Page 1 of 2
Maximizing SPU RAM
V 1.0
Rob Vawter SCEA
A. Reducing the size of VAG data
Note:Not all of these methods may be used in tandem.
1. Removal of the SPU IRQ Clear Block
The last 16 bytes of each non-looping VAG are called an SPU IRQ Clear Block. These blocks ensure
that an IRQ placed in a VAG body does not get spuriously called over and over. However, if your
programmers are not using any of the libspu functions with "IRQ" in the name AND not using any of the
SpuSt... VAG streaming functions, this block can be stripped off.
2. Setting all AIFF sizes to 28 sample boundaries
Everyone should know that AIFFs which will loop in VAG format must have loop markers set on 28 byte
boundaries (both loop start and loop end, which is always sample end). This need not be the case for non-looping
VAGs. But, any non-looping AIFF which has a remainder of 1 or 2 samples will be padded out with zero data
during conversion to create what is basically a 28 sample divisible AIFF file anyway. If the sound artist can pare
down some of these AIFF files, quite a few samples can be saved.
3. Downsampling
Downsampling allows for smaller sample data. AIFF2VAG supports from 44.1KHz all the way down to 5KHz.
4. SPU streaming
Allows for playback of VAGs larger than the available memory in SPU RAM. See libspu overview for details.
A. Increasing the amount of usable SPU RAM
1. Use of SPU RAM addresses 0x1000-0x100f
Hopefully, this feature will be available in library v. 4.3. This 16 byte block of memory contains another SPU
IRQ Clear Block and can be overwritten under certain circumstances. See #A1 above for more details.
Currently, however, SpuSetTransferStartAddr() (also called from within the libsnd transfer functions) will
not allow 0x1000 as a valid address.
2. Create and use a "best fit" SPU RAM memory manager
SpuMalloc() is a "first fit" memory manager, not a "best fit" memory manager. A "first fit" memory manager
walks the memory management list until it finds a block large enough to fit the requested size; that block is
then allocated. A "best fit" memory manager walks the entire memory management list and chooses the
block which is the smallest block greater than or equal to the requested size; that block is then allocated. A
"best fit" memory manager will tend to fragment memory less, and therefore allow more sample data to be
resident in SPU RAM for sound engines using dynamic loading. I have suggested code changes to make
SpuMalloc() (also used by SsVabOpenHead) a "best fit" memory manager. Hopefully, this will be available
by library version 4.3
Page 2 of 2
C. Make the most of the available samples
1. Change sample pitch
Excited crowd noise VAG is the same as background crowd noise, only with a faster playback rate.
2. Using dynamic looping to lengthen sound effects
Hopefully, in an upcoming version of the libraries, functions will exist which allow dynamic looping of sounds to
create the appearance of more sounds. For example, you could loop in the middle of a sound, lengthening the
sound before, such as "Goooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooal!" Therefore, the play-by-play announcer can
lengthen or shorten his call dependent on the team, player, and situation.
3. Pitch LFO
Pitch LFO allows the playback rate of one muted voice to affect the playback of another. This can create different
effects for the same sample data. See libspu overview for more details.
4. Noise Generator
Also known as a white noise generator. Could be used to create effects like TV static or a Geiger counter. See libspu
overview for details