CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / Environment Mapping
Environment Mapping
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
Environment Mapping and other lies.
OK, its not possible to do environment mapping
in real time unless you happen to be NASA
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
But there are some funky effects you
can do…
Chrome mapping
Reflection mapping
Water
Specular Highlights
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
What is Environment Mapping?
Environment mapping is used to model reflective
surfaces
The object is enclosed by a three dimensional
surface onto which the environment is projected.
Reflected Rays are projected from the object, hit
the surface and then are indexed into the map.
This isn’t a realistic proposition on PS in real time.
We don’t have time to render all the things we’d
like to see, let alone render a whole series of
world views
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
What is Chrome Mapping?
Instead of projecting the environment onto a 3d
surface, we project a texture with a random
chrome look to it, this is used to texture the object
and from a distance it looks all shiny and
reflective.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
Advantages of Chrome Mapping
With environment mapping you see the scene
reflected in the objects surface
With chrome mapping you see something that
might look a little how the scene might look if it
was reflected in the surface. It is more like a
diffuse reflection
Easy to implement
Far less computationally expensive than
environment mapping
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
Doing it on Playstation
Chrome Mapping that is….
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
Choosing a 3 dimensional surface
algorithm
TrueSpace offers cubic, cylindrical and spherical
surrounding surfaces
Spherical is the simplest to implement
A sphere only has 1 surface, a cylinder has 3, a cube 6
For more information on how to project the normals
more accurately consult the references presented at the
end
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
How to project rays out from the
surface
Use the normals
Use the vertex normals. As the vertex normals are
shared by the surrounding polys this ensures the
texture matches up between adjacent polygons
Normals are of Unit length (4096)
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
BUT….
Have to apply the same rotation to the normals as
to the vertices to get the right view
Otherwise the texture will always stay the same
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
How to create the enclosing sphere
Use Latitude-Longitude solution
Latitude (lines running east west) - Lines of constant v
Longitude (lines running north south) - Lines of
constant u
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
So: How to do it (1)
Assume enclosing sphere has a radius of Unit
length and object has a size of 0
So normal vector components are in the range -
4096 to +4096
Texture coordinates in the range 0..255 (in my
example)
a normal has 3 components(X,Y,Z), a texture map
has 2 components (U,V)
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
So: How to do it (2)
We need to get 2 textures values e.g. (U,V)
Take the Y vector and use it to obtain a V
coordinate
Combine the Z and X vector to obtain a U
coordinate
In practice only need to use the X vector to get a
result that looks cool
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
Example
Take the y component of the normal vector and
use it to derive the v coordinate of the texture
map
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
Disadvantages of this technique
Glitching near the poles.
Use abstract soft textures
Slow. Even this simple system is computationally
expensive
Restrict its use to special objects, power ups etc.
If you use it too much, you’ll wear it out...
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
Other things to consider
Maybe possible to use a look up table for the u,v
coordinates dependent on how free your viewing
is...
An animated texture could also produce a similar
result for simple cases…
Use an animated texture with chrome map
Could be used for Fiery reflections?
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
Reflection Maps
What if it was possible to combine the texture
map with the chrome map…
Calculate the vertexes for the poly
Render 1 poly solid with the texture on it
Render a second poly, which is semi transparent
with the chrome map texture on it, directly over
the first poly
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
Refraction Maps
Modeling the bending of light through different
mediums
Same structure as the chrome mapping but using
a different algorithm to generate the texture
coordinates
Cool for water distortion effects
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
Water
A water surface can be modeled using a
derivation of chrome mapping
Use the normals to calculate the texture for the
reflection
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
Water (2)
Combine reflection and refraction maps for the
best simulation of water
Very expensive
Very nice!
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
Specular Highlights
So while we’re messing around with the
normals……
Use to normal information to selectively boost the
vertex RGB values
Use the normal information to locate the position for a
highlight sprite
Use your imagination!!
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97/ Environment Mapping
References
Advanced Animation & Rendering Techniques
Allan and Mark Watt Addison-Wesley
ISBN 0-201-54412-1
3d Computer Animation
John Vince Addison-Wesley
ISBN 0-201-62756-6