PlayStation Operating System
© 1998 Sony Computer Entertainment Inc.
Publication date: August 1998
Sony Computer Entertainment America
919 E. Hillsdale Blvd., 2nd floor
Foster City, CA 94404
Sony Computer Entertainment Europe
Waverley House
7-12 Noel Street
London W1V 4HH, England
The PlayStation Operating System manual is supplied pursuant to and subject to the terms of the Sony
Computer Entertainment PlayStation® License and Development Tools Agreements, the Licensed
Publisher Agreement and/or the Licensed Developer Agreement.
The PlayStation Operating System manual is intended for distribution to and use by only Sony Computer
Entertainment licensed Developers and Publishers in accordance with the PlayStation® License and
Development Tools Agreements, the Licensed Publisher Agreement and/or the Licensed Developer
Agreement.
Unauthorized reproduction, distribution, lending, rental or disclosure to any third party, in whole or in part,
of this book is expressly prohibited by law and by the terms of the Sony Computer Entertainment
PlayStation® License and Development Tools Agreements, the Licensed Publisher Agreement and/or the
Licensed Developer Agreement.
Ownership of the physical property of the book is retained by and reserved by Sony Computer
Entertainment. Alteration to or deletion, in whole or in part, of the book, its presentation, or its contents is
prohibited.
The information in the PlayStation Operating System manual is subject to change without notice. The
content of this book is Confidential Information of Sony Computer Entertainment.
PlayStation and PlayStation logos are registered trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. All other
trademarks are property of their respective owners and/or their licensors.
PlayStation Operating System
Table of Contents
List of Figures iv
List of Tables iv
About This Manual v
Changes Since Last Release v
Related Documentation v
Manual Structure v
Developer Reference Series v
Typographic Conventions vi
Developer Support vii
Chapter 1: <PS-X OS> Overview
What is <PS-X OS> 1-3
Characteristics of <PS-X OS> 1-3
Programming with C 1-3
Easy Access to the Features of the R3000 1-3
Light Volume, Small Scale, Emphasis on Performance 1-3
Single Task or Multi-Tasking 1-4
Device Driver Based File System 1-4
Chapter 2: <PS-X OS> in Reality
Starting and Operating the OS 2-3
Starting the Operating System 2-3
Hardware Mode 2-3
Application Boot 2-3
Booting in a PC/AT Compatible Development Environment 2-3
System Designation File SYSTEM.CNF 2-3
Debug Mode 2-4
Debug Monitor 2-4
SCSI Monitor 2-4
File System 2-4
File Name Conventions 2-4
Subdirectories 2-4
Number of Files 2-4
Memory Management 2-4
Memory Map 2-4
I Cache 2-5
D Cache 2-6
System Tables (ToT) 2-6
Definition of ToT Data Structure 2-6
R3000 Registers 2-6
General Purpose Registers 2-6
AT Register 2-7
Return Address 2-7
C Language Function Arguments 2-8
C Language Function Return Value 2-8
Stack 2-8
Global Pointer 2-8
Program Counter 2-8
Immediately after Power-On Reset 2-8
Chapter 3: <PS-X OS> Service
<PS-X OS> Service 3-3
Module Management Service 3-3
Event Management Service 3-3
Controller Service 3-3
iv Table of Contents
PlayStation Operating System
I/O Management Service 3-3
Thread Management Service 3-3
Other Services 3-3
Standard C Library 3-3
Root Counter Management Service 3-4
PS-X Library 3-4
File Format 3-4
Chapter 4: Programming Tips
Use in Single-Task Mode 4-3
Prohibition of Interrupts 4-3
Overlay Processing 4-3
Character String Display 4-3
Storage of Game Data 4-3
Acceleration of Execution Speed 4-3
File Partition and Placement 4-3
Using the I Cache 4-3
Using the S Segment 4-4
Heap Memory 4-4
Program Entry Point 4-4
Vertical Blanking-Period Detection 4-4
Standard Input/Output 4-5
CD-ROM Simulator 4-5
Settings Necessary when Activating a Program 4-5
List of Figures
Figure 2–1: Logic Memory/Physical Memory Allocation 2-5
List of Tables
Table 2–1: System Designation File Keyword List 2-3
Table 2–2: Memory Map 2-5
Table 2–3: System Tables 2-6
Table 2–4: R3000 General Purpose Registers 2-7
Table 3–1: Types of Library Files 3-4
PlayStation Operating System
About This Manual
This manual is the latest release of instructional material relating to the PlayStation® operating system as of
Run-Time Library release 4.3. The purpose of this document is to describe the operating system and
related fundamentals.
Changes Since Last Release
There have been no substantial changes in this document since its last release.
Related Documentation
This manual should be read in conjunction with the Library Overview and Library Reference.
Note:The Developer Support Website posts current developments regarding the Libraries and also
provides notice of future documentation releases and upgrades.
Manual Structure
Section Description
Ch. 1: <PS-X OS> Overview A flexible and powerful operating system is part
of the PS-X. By using this operating system, you
may maximize the capabilities of PS-X.
Ch. 2: <PS-X OS> in Reality Describes starting the OS, using the memory
map and other activities that one must
understand when accessing the operating
system.
Ch. 3: <PS-X OS> Service The most significant characteristic of <PS-X OS>
is that all features controlling the R3000 and
PS-X hardware are provided as C functions.
Because of this, the burden on the program
developer is lightened; he or she may proceed
with development more efficiently.
Ch. 4: Programming Tips Describes precautions and tips when
programming with <PS-X OS>.
Developer Reference Series
This manual is part of the Developer Reference Series, a series of technical reference volumes covering all
aspects of PlayStation development. The complete series is listed below:
Manual Description
PlayStation Hardware Describes the PlayStation hardware architecture
and overviews its subsystems.
PlayStation Operating System Describes the PlayStation operating system and
related programming fundamentals.
Run-Time Library Overview Describes the structure and purpose of the
run-time libraries provided for PlayStation
software development.
Run-Time Library Reference Defines all available PlayStation run-time library
functions, macros and structures.
Inline Programming Reference Describes in-line programming using DMPSX,
GTE inline macro and GTE register information.
vi About This Manual
PlayStation Operating System
SDevTC Development Environment Describes the SDevTC (formerly "Psy-Q")
Development Environment for PlayStation
software development.
3D Graphics Tools Describes how to use the PlayStation 3D
Graphics Tools, including the animation and
material editors.
Sprite Editor Describes the Sprite Editor tool for creating
sprite data and background picture
components.
Sound Artist Tool Provides installation and operation instructions
for the DTL-H800 Sound Artist Board and
explains how to use the Sound Artist Tool
software.
File Formats Describes all native PlayStation data formats.
Data Conversion Utilities Describes all available PlayStation data
conversion utilities, including both stand-alone
and plug-in programs.
CD Emulator Provides installation and operation instructions
for the CD Emulator subsystem and related
software.
CD-ROM Generator Describes how to use the CD-ROM Generator
software to write CD-R discs.
Performance Analyzer User Guide Provides general instructions for using the
Performance Analyzer software.
Performance Analyzer Technical Reference Describes how to measure software
performance and interpret the results using the
Performance Analyzer.
DTL-H2000 Installation and Operation Provides installation and operation instructions
for the DTL-H2000 Development System.
DTL-H2500/2700 Installation and Operation Provides installation and operation instructions
for the DTL-H2500/H2700 Development
Systems.
Typographic Conventions
Certain Typographic Conventions are used through out this manual to clarify the meaning of the text. The
following conventions apply to all narrative text except for structure and function descriptions:
Convention Meaning
courier Indicates literal program code.
Bold Indicates a document, chapter or section title.
The following conventions apply within structure and function descriptions only:
Convention Meaning
Medium Bold Denotes structure or function types and names.
Italic Denotes function arguments and structure members.
About This Manual vii
PlayStation Operating System
Developer Support
Sony Computer Entertai Computer Entertai Computer Entertai Computer Entertainment America (SCEA ment America (SCEA) ment America (SCEA ment America (SCEA)
SCEA developer support is available to licensees in North America only. You may obtain developer support
or additional copies of this documentation by contacting the following addresses:
Order Information Developer Support
In North AmericaIn North America In North America In North America In North America In North AmericaIn North America In North America
Attn: Developer Tools Coordinator E-mail: DevTech_Support@playstation.sony.com
Sony Computer Entertainment America Web: http://www.scea.sony.com/dev
919 East Hillsdale Blvd., 2nd floor Developer Support Hotline: (650) 655-8181
Foster City, CA 94404 (Call Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.,
Tel: (650) 655-8000 PST/PDT)
Sony Computer Entertai Computer Entertai Computer Entertai Computer Entertainment Europe (SCEE) ment Europe (SCEE ment Europe (SCEE ment Europe (SCEE)
SCEE developer support is available to licensees in Europe only. You may obtain developer support or
additional copies of this documentation by contacting the following addresses:
Order Information Developer Support
In EuropeIn Europe In Europe In Europe In Europe In EuropeIn Europe In Europe
Attn: Production Coordinator E-mail: dev_support@playstation.co.uk
Sony Computer Entertainment Europe Web: https://www-s.playstation.co.uk
Waverley House Developer Support Hotline:
7-12 Noel Street +44 (0) 171 447 1680
London W1V 4HH (Call Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.,
Tel: +44 (0) 171 447 1600 GMT or BST/BDT)
viii About This Manual
PlayStation Operating System
PlayStation Operating System
Chapter 1:
<PS-X OS> Overview
1-2 <PS-X OS> Overview
PlayStation Operating System
<PS-X OS> Overview 1-3
PlayStation Operating System
What is <PS-X OS>
<PS-X OS> was developed for the R3000, the CPU of PS-X. The efficiency of program development is very
dependent on the environment and services that the operating system in a machine provides. If it has a fast
enough CPU and peripheral devices, there is no need to take time to figure out a method of maximizing the
capabilities of the hardware and one may concentrate on programming by skillfully using the services
provided by the OS.
The design concept of the <PS-X OS> lies in providing an environment for the developer of game programs
and for enabling you to control programs with interrupts more easily. Based on this concept the kernel of
the <PS-X OS> is provided as the aggregate of the services (subroutines) controlling the R3000 and the
PS-X hardware.
In addition each service is provided as a C language function. By using C, not only may we aim for better
source code readability and maintainability, it also makes block structure description and function calls
easier and makes it possible to program with greater ease.
Characteristics of <PS-X OS>
There are many characteristics of <PS-X OS> which implement its concept of computing.
Programming with C
For control of the R3000 CPU, control of the PS-X hardware units etc., all services are provided as
C language functions. Thus, programming may be performed throughout in C.
Easy Access to the Features of the R3000
Though the interrupt processing procedures in the R3000 are said to be complex, the operating system
under the <PS-X OS> makes use of a substitute dispatcher system and provides a simple interface. Of
course the overhead that accompanies the dispatcher is kept very low. In addition, in ordinary operating
systems the low level implementation details are not disclosed. In this way, operating system chip
capabilities are maximized and a higher level of tuning may be achieved. Of course because everything can
be done in C, there is no need to learn the intricacies of R3000 assembler.
Light Volume, Small Scale, Emphasis on Performance
If the operating system is slow in speed it could ruin a speedy game program. In order to place emphasis
on performance of applications, the size in RAM of <PS-X OS> has been kept to a maximum of
64 Kilobytes, and it was also designed so that the CPU occupied time is minimized. In addition the
OS system tables have been disclosed and consideration has been given to expansion of the operating
system and acquisition of internal data.
Furthermore, in the <PS-X OS> operating system, checks of prohibited items seen in other operating
systems have been eliminated in order to aim for greater speed. These checks should be performed by the
application. Thus, though there is the danger that essentially prohibited operations will end up being
performed, cautious programming makes possible higher level tuning .
Until now in hardware control of consoles, one had to analyze hardware driver code and painstakingly work
through everything with an assembler. In order to lighten this burden all hardware features are provided as
C language functions by the <PS-X OS>. The overhead of each function is kept to a minimum.
1-4 <PS-X OS> Overview
PlayStation Operating System
Single Task or Multi-Tasking
The <PS-X OS> is basically a multi-tasking operating system that can perform multiple processing
asynchronously. Multi-task control is appropriate for controlling a CD-ROM, a comparatively slow device, or
things like playing background music.
In addition, we have made it possible to select multi-tasking mode as an option for those who are
accustomed to traditional programming, in other words, those who are used to single task. Immediately
after starting the OS it is single task mode, and it is possible to select operating mode by making a
selection at this point.
Device Driver Based File System
The file system (i.e., files of data on CD-ROM) in <PS-X OS> is accessed via a device driver. This allows
multiple file systems to coexist and increases development time by avoiding low level file manipulation
problems.
PlayStation Operating System
Chapter 2:
<PS-X OS> in Reality
2-2 <PS-X OS> in Reality
PlayStation Operating System
<PS-X OS> in Reality 2-3
PlayStation Operating System
Starting and Operating the OS
<PS-X OS> is an operating system that provides an “environment for game program developers.” Thus, it
is basically not outfitted with an interface for the user to operate hardware directly (except for the debug
monitor in the debugging environment). It is necessary for the application to provide the user interface.
Starting the Operating System
There are two start modes with the <PS-X OS> operating system. The mode is determined by the dip
switches of the target box and is changed when the target box is turned on or reset. Please refer to the
PlayStation Hardware guide for setting the dip switches.
Hardware Mode
This is the mode that corresponds to booting the actual PS-X hardware.
Application Boot
The Application Boot jumps first to a specific address in ROM and performs a check of the hardware
connected (CD-ROM drive etc.).
Next, it makes a decision on type of disk in the CD-ROM drive. If the disk is the appropriate one, it retrieves
a system designation file, system.cnf, and executes it.
If there is no disk it goes into a looping demonstration.
Booting in a PC/AT Compatible Development Environment
When the dipswitch is set so that the system can be booted from a developer host (PC/AT compatible
machine), the kernel is set in the default configuration (please refer to the Run-time Library/Reference) and
then the remote debugger is started. The reading and execution of the execute file that corresponds to the
final stage of the boot sequence is performed manually. The kernel configuration cannot be altered.
System Designation File SYSTEM.CNF
The PS-X system settings and the applications that will be started are described here.
The parameters are described from the beginning of a line in <key word> = <content> format.
Description is all done in 1 byte uppercase alphanumeric characters and a space is necessary on both
sides of the equal sign. Lowercase characters may not be used. When the same parameter reoccurs in a
file the first version found takes precedence. Below are the parameters that may be described.
Table 2–1: System Designation File Keyword List
Keyword Content
BOOT Specify the name of the file to be started. Default is GAME.PSX.
Example: BOOT = PSXAPP.EXE
TCB Specify the number of tasks. The default is 4
Example: TCB = 5
EVENT Specify the number of events. The default is 16.
Example: EVENT = 5
STACK The stack pointer value when the file specified by BOOT is started.
Default is 0x8001FF00.
Example: STACK = 800FFF0
2-4 <PS-X OS> in Reality
PlayStation Operating System
Debug Mode
Debug mode is valid in the debug environment, in other words only with the target box. There are three
applications in debug mode.
Debug Monitor
The AT register is used as a work area by the assembler. C compiler and assembler programmer are not
permitted to use this register.
SCSI Monitor
SCSI channel 0 is a CPU device, and may be used for execution of remote commands from a host,
debugging at C source level, as a DOS device driver and for file transfers.
File System
In the PS-X, CD-ROM is used as the application supply medium. That is to say, the file system of the <PSX OS> takes as a premise that files are on CD-ROM.
The file system of PS-X is based on ISO 9660 level 1 which is an international standard.
File Name Conventions
File names take the format of <BASENAME><EXT>. The <BASENAME> is eight 1 byte alphanumeric
characters and the <EXT> is 3 alphanumeric characters. 1 byte katakana and 2 byte Chinese characters
(kanji) cannot be used. <BASENAME> and <EXT> are separated by a period. This is the same name format
as used in MS-DOS.
Subdirectories
Subdirectories cannot be created. Files are all arranged in the root directory.
Number of Files
There is no limit on the number of files that may be placed in the root directory.
Memory Management
Using memory space on the R3000 is important when using <PS-X OS>. Here we shall explain the
memory management of the <PS-X OS>, focusing on the memory map.
Memory Map
We will explain the memory map of <PS-X OS>.
To begin with, we call the space that a program uses logic space. Logic space is expressed by a 32-bit
address, and is mapped on physical space in multi layer. In C language it is accessed with a long pointer.
<PS-X OS> in Reality 2-5
PlayStation Operating System
Figure 2–1: Logic Memory/Physical Memory Allocation
Physical space is an address in the installed memory device (i.e., an address on the actual memory chip). If
a logic space address is accessed that is not mapped in physical space, a bus error will be generated.
Interface registers with peripheral devices are also mapped in logic space (i.e., memory mapped I/O).
Memory devices may be accessed with 1 to 4 byte units but accessing the interface register is done by a
method that uses specific size units. When accessed by units other than this a bus error will be generated.
Table 2–2: Memory Map
Logic space (32 bit) Segment name Cache
0x00000000~max0x00fffffff A Valid
0x1f800000~0x1f8003ff S Invalid
0x1f801000~0x1fbfffff X Invalid
0x1fc00000~0x1fc7ffff P Valid
0x80000000~0x80000000+max B Valid
0x9fc00000~0x9fc7ffff Q Valid
0xa0000000~0xa0000000+max C Invalid
0xbfc00000~0xbfc7ffff R Invalid
Physical space Corresponding logic segment Device
0x000000~max0x00ffffff A • B • C RAM
0x1f800000~0x1f8003ff S RAM in CPU
0x1f801000~0x1fbfffff X Device
0x1fc00000~0x1fc7ffff P • Q • R ROM
I Cache
The validity/invalidity of the Instruction Cache (hereafter I cache) is determined by the upper 4 bits of the
logic space. With the segments that correspond to the memory devices mentioned earlier I cache is valid
for A, B, P and Q, but is invalid with C and R. Segments in the R3000 refer to block units separating
memory space from features and differ in this respect from other CPU’s (8086 type), so please be careful.
When I cache is valid, machine code is read into I cache in a block. If the desired instruction is in I cache,
main memory does not need to be accessed via the bus. Speed of execution of applications is improved.
The I cache is packaged with 1K words (4 kilobytes), and one way mapped. In other words, logic space is
divided into 4 kilobyte units, and these units are mapped onto the I cache.
2-6 <PS-X OS> in Reality
PlayStation Operating System
D Cache
The D cache is configured by the high-speed memory loaded in the CPU. Internally it is structured as a
scratch pad and is mapped in the memory space as S segment so that developers can access it.
Both data and programs may be placed in this segment. However, it cannot be the target of a DMA
transfer.
System Tables (ToT)
In order to uniformly access each type of system table used internally in the operating system, system table
information is disclosed as the structure ToT (Table of Tables). ToT is placed at address 0x00000100.
The contents of ToT are as follows:
Table 2–3: System Tables
Entries Nature
0 Queue header requires interrupt processing
1 Task state queue header
2 Task management block
3 System reserved
4 Event management block
5-31 System reserved
Definition of ToT Data Structure
The ToT data structure is described by the following C structure.
The structure is defined in the header file include/kernel.h.
struct ToT { /*system table table*/
unsigned long *head; /*system table lead address*/
long size; /*system table size (byte)*/
};
R3000 Registers
Here we shall explain the R3000 registers. For higher level programming knowledge of the R3000 registers
is necessary but in normal C programming there is no need to be especially conscious of it.
The R3000 registers may be divided into General Purpose Registers and a Program Counter.
General Purpose Registers
There are 32, 32-bit general purpose registers. Each register is assigned to the following specific uses by
the compiler. When using a threaded data base and developing with an assembler, it is necessary to use
the registers in the following way:
<PS-X OS> in Reality 2-7
PlayStation Operating System
Table 2–4: R3000 General Purpose Registers
Macro (1) Macro (2) Assignment
R_ZERO R_R0 0 fixed
R_AT R_R1 Assembler reserves
R_V0 R_R2 Return value
R_V1 R_R3 Return value (for double type)
R_A0 R_R4 Argument #1
R_A1 R_R5 Argument #2
R_A2 R_R6 Argument #3
R_A3 R_R7 Argument #4
R_T0 R_R8 Temporaries
R_T1 R_R9 Temporaries
R_T2 R_R10 Temporaries
R_T3 R_R11 Temporaries
R_T4 R_R12 Temporaries
R_T5 R_R13 Temporaries
R_T6 R_R14 Temporaries
R_T7 R_R15 Saved temporaries
R_S0 R_R16 Saved temporaries
R_S1 R_R17 Saved temporaries
R_S2 R_R18 Saved temporaries
R_S3 R_R19 Saved temporaries
R_S4 R_R20 Saved temporaries
R_S5 R_R21 Saved temporaries
R_S6 R_R22 Saved temporaries
R_S7 R_R23 Saved temporaries
R_T8 R_R24 Temporaries
R_T9 R_R25 Temporaries
R_K0 R_R26 Kernel reserved #0
R_K1 R_R27 Kernel reserved #1
R_GP R_R28 Global pointer
R_SP R_R29 Stack pointer
R_FP R_R30 Frame pointer
R_RA R_R31 Return address
Precautions to be taken when using the general purpose registers are as follows:
AT Register
The assembler uses the AT register as a work area. The C compiler and assembler program are prohibited
from using this register.
Return Address
The R3000 does not have a subroutine call concept. Therefore, this is substituted by a jump command
saving the return address in a register. The assembler may specify the register where it is saved but the
compiler is restricted to the RA register.
2-8 <PS-X OS> in Reality
PlayStation Operating System
C Language Function Arguments
When there are less than 4 arguments they are stored in A0 to A3 registers in order from the left. When
there are more than 4 arguments they are accumulated on the stack. Space for 4 arguments is allocated
on the stack, but is dummy. The remaining arguments are passed on the stack; the first 4 are in registers
as usual.
C Language Function Return Value
The return value of a function is stored in the V0 register when less than 32 bits. When 64 bits (double) the
32 high order bits are stored in the V1 register.
Stack
There is no stack concept in the R3000. Therefore, the compiler stores the pointer in the SP register and
implements a stack. In order to efficiently use a function frame (a memory area for automatic variables and
a work area) it stores the lead address of the frame for that function in the FP register. This value is
determined initially by SP. When the module is started, FP is set to SP.
Global Pointer
The R3000 memory is accessed by “encoded 16-bit offset register indirect mode.” In order to effectively
accomplish this, the compiler consolidates the variables up to 64 Kilobytes in a “bss section” block. Here
the block’s start address is stored in the GP register and using the above mode access is performed by
one word. This address value is called a global pointer and it does not vary in the module.
Program Counter
The program counter cannot be accessed directly.
Immediately after Power-On Reset
The program counter will be 0xbfc00000.
When there is an external interrupt and when an error (except a debug error) occurs
• The content of the program counter will be saved to the EPC register of coprocessor 0 (the section that
handles errors and interrupts in the R3000).
• The processor jumps to 0x00000080.
PlayStation Operating System
Chapter 3:
<PS-X OS> Service
3-2 <PS-X OS> Service
PlayStation Operating System
<PS-X OS> Service 3-3
PlayStation Operating System
<PS-X OS> Service
The services provided by <PS-X OS> are called application programmer interfaces (API). The programs
that call the OS must have their function libraries linked. All of the PS-X features are covered by the API.
Program readability will increase if only API calls are used.
Application Interfaces (API)
A general service for controlling PS-X hardware including the CPU. All of the PS-X features are covered by
the API.
The API has the following services. Please refer to the Run-time Library/Reference concerning functions
provided by the API, and details about data structures.
Module Management Service
Module management is a basic service that loads and executes user application programs.
Event Management Service
Event management is a service controlling program execution triggered by asynchronously occurring
events.
Controller Service
This is a service that deals with the controller, which is the PS-X ‘s chief input device. It supports up to 64
controllers which are configured with a maximum of 16 buttons.
I/O Management Service
This is a service supporting low-level input/output to files and logic devices. All file control in PS-X is
performed using this service.
Thread Management Service
Threads are aggregates of resources necessary for executing programs. Specifically they are composed of
register states, stack areas and CPU states. Multiple threads, multi-tasking and multi-interrupts can be
implemented using thread management.
Other Services
There are various other services, for example, setting up the I cache and the R3000 etc., and authorizing or
prohibiting processing of interrupts.
Standard C Library
Provides standard C functions based on K & R such as character string operations, standard input and
outputs.
3-4 <PS-X OS> Service
PlayStation Operating System
Root Counter Management Service
Provides a counting feature which is used by game programmers for time restrictions and timing
adjustments.
A Root counter causes automatic count timing. There are 4 elements to this:
1. Display pixels
2. Horizontal synchronization
3. System clock
4. Vertical synchronization
In all of these counters except vertical synchronization a 16-bit target value can be set.
Counters count from zero and when they reach the target value generate an interrupt, then automatically
clear to zero and begin counting again. The target value of vertical synchronization is fixed at 1.
PS-X Library
This is a group of C functions which are for controlling expression features like graphics and sound. It
provides the following library files. Please refer to the Run-time Library/Reference for details.
Table 3–1: Types of Library Files
Name of library Feature
libgpu CPU basic operation
libgte GTE basic operation
libgs Expanded graphics system
libpress Data compression
libstr Streaming
libsnd Sound
libapi Kernel service
libetc Other
File Format
This defines the internal structure of the files that the PS-X library processes. PS-X special tools also
generate and process files in this format.
PlayStation Operating System
Chapter 4:
Programming Tips
4-2 Programming Tips
PlayStation Operating System
Programming Tips 4-3
PlayStation Operating System
Use in Single-Task Mode
<PS-X OS> is basically a multi-tasking operating system which starts out in single task mode. If the
programmer does not start multiple threads it will operate in single task mode. One does not necessarily
have to use the multi-tasking feature.
Prohibition of Interrupts
By calling the EnterCritical Section( ) function, interrupts can be stopped. Authorization is performed by
EnterCritical Section( ).
Overlay Processing
Overlay processing in the PS-X program takes the form of executing a child process from a resident
module.
The operating system drives the hardware and starts the file to be executed, but in overlay processing it is
necessary for the application to do this.
Character String Display
There is no character generator and fonts are not provided in PS-X. To display character strings the
application must provide data and must perform this as part of a graphics operation.
Storage of Game Data
A special PS-X back up cartridge is provided as a game data storage device. Since special functions are
also provided for the cartridge, this may be used during programming.
Acceleration of Execution Speed
Here we shall provide a number of tips for increasing the speed of execution of applications.
File Partition and Placement
By partitioning files into appropriate sizes and placing them carefully on the CD-ROM, the speed of starting
and reading of data can be increased.
Using the I Cache
Of the segments that correspond to the memory devices described in Chapter 2, <PS-X OS> in Reality, I
cache is valid with A, B, P and Q and is invalid with C and R. Since the size of I cache is 4 kilobytes, it is
very important where and how code is placed. Careful placement of code can result in increased speed.
4-4 Programming Tips
PlayStation Operating System
Using the S Segment
Using the S segment that is part of the CPU’s high-speed memory is another factor in increasing speed.
Heap Memory
The C language heap memory management function group is provided as one part of the C library but
<PS-X OS> does not do the initialization necessary for its use. That is because the game program
developer must manage all memory available.
When using the heap memory management functions, first execute the heap memory initialization functions
belonging to “other services” and then specify the start address and size of the heap memory.
Program Entry Point
The first program started in running PS-X is prepared as an execute file. The file name may be specified
following the boot sequence (please refer to the PlayStationHardware manual). The first address to be
executed of the execute file—the entry point—may be specified by a function name at link time. When not
specified, main( ), the C language default, will be selected. The function that will be the entry point cannot
be given an argument.
Vertical Blanking-Period Detection
If the root counter and the event management service are used, the beginning of the vertical blanking
period can be detected. The beginning of the vertical blank acts as a trigger so that polling, calling of queue
functions and starting of handler functions can be performed. Call queuing functions in the following way:
Sample()
{
unsigned long EV;
EnterCriticalSection();
EV = OpenEvent (RCntCNT3, EvSpINT, EvMdNOINTR, NULL);
EnableEvent (EV);
SetRCnt (RCntCNT3, 1, RCntMdINTR);
StartRCnt (RCntCNT3);
........
/* Initialization of controller */
........
while (1){
WaitEvent (EV);
........
}
}
Programming Tips 4-5
PlayStation Operating System
Standard Input/Output
Immediately after starting, standard output is allocated to file descriptor 0 and standard input to file
descriptor 1. The input output device is RS232C channel 0 (device name “tty00”). Input output functions
such as printf( ) and getchar( ) may be used. The circuit designation of this port is 8-bit characters, 1 stop
bit, no parity, hardware flow control. Control with PC/AT can be performed with the special cable packaged
together with the target box. A 25 pin type host may be connected by cable.
CD-ROM Simulator
The CD-ROM simulator feature, which uses the developer host file system, is provided as one aspect of the
development environment. Please refer to the SDevTC Development Environment manual.
Settings Necessary when Activating a Program
In addition to designating a starting address (the program counter initial value) a stack pointer (SP) value
should be set. When executing a program and a value corresponding to an address that cannot be
accessed is in the stack pointer a bus error will be generated.
4-6 Programming Tips
PlayStation Operating System