CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
The DTL-H2700
Development System
and
Performance Analyzer
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Overview
Introducing the DTL-H2700
The Hardware
The DTL-H2700 as Development System
The DTL-H2700 as Performance Analyzer
Why Analyze?
Methods for Optimizing PlayStation Programs
Optimizing the CPU Process
Optimizing the GPU Process
Using the Performance Analyzer to Analyze
PlayStation Programs
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Introducing the DTL-H2700
Introducing The DTL-H2700
The Hardware
The DTL-H2700 as Development System
The DTL-H2700 as Performance Analyzer
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Introducing the DTL-H2700
The Hardware
3 Card Design
Plugs into a single ISA slot on an Intel-based PC
Requires space for 3 full-length cards
Does not use PCI bus
Most computer systems do not have room for 3 full length PCI
bus cards.
Even if your system DID have room, would you want to use up 3
PCI bus slots?
Takes power connector like a disk drive.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Introducing the DTL-H2700
The Hardware
Uses DTL-H2510 CDROM mechanism
Unlike the DTL-H2010 “black box” external CDROM drive
used with the DTL-H2000 development system, the DTLH2510 uses the same mechanism as contained in PlayStation.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Introducing the DTL-H2700
DTL-H2700 Development System
8 Megabytes DRAM
Compatible with DTL-H2000 drivers & tools
DEXBIOS, etc.
Can be used with CD Emulator
Uses Flash ROM BIOS
Does not require SNPATCH.CPE
No special programming requirements
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Introducing the DTL-H2700
DTL-H2700 Performance Analyzer
No special software drivers required
Standard DTL-H2000 drivers may be installed without conflict
Used in conjunction with, but separately from,
development system.
Other PlayStation programming tools may be used
concurrently (DBUGPSX, etc.)
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Introducing the DTL-H2700
Performance
Analyzer
Software &
Psy-Q
Debugger
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Introducing the DTL-H2700
DTL-H2700 Performance Analyzer
Monitors whatever software process is executing on
the rest of the DTL-2700 hardware.
Downloaded CPE files
EXE files from Bootable CDs running on DTL-H2510
EXE files from bootable image running on CD Emulator
When trigger condition detected, captures signals on
the PlayStation bus for a predetermined length of time
64mb of capture RAM
Up to roughly 7.4/60ths of a second
Captures on manual trigger switch, GUN interrupt, specific
RAM location accesses, or link cable signals
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Introducing the DTL-H2700
DTL-H2700 Performance Analyzer
Performance Analyzer application for Windows
16-bit Windows application runs under Windows 3.1 or
Windows 95
Does not work with Windows NT
If no analysis is required, the Performance Analyzer software
is not required.
Displays graphical analysis of captured bus signals.
Shows how much time is spent loading I-Cache, doing DMA
operations, performing data reads & writes
AND MUCH MORE!
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Methods for Optimizing
PlayStation Programs
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Why Analyze?
Determine why a program runs slowly.
Estimate how much performance improvement
can be achieved.
Determine available margin for program
additions.
Evaluate algorithms & graphics designs at early
stages
Monitor hangups
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
PlayStation System Architecture
MDEC
CD SPU ROM
Scratch Pad RAM
1KB
Instruction Cache
4KB
SIO
Controller
Four-stage
Write Buffer
To the display monitor
CPU Core GTE
Video RAM
1MB
Main RAM BUS
Sub BUS
Video RAM
BUS
GPU
I
D
Main RAM
2MB
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Optimizing the CPU Process
Reduce I-Cache misses
Reduce Read Accesses to main RAM
Reduce Write Buffer Flush Penalties
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Optimizing the CPU Process
Reduce I-Cache misses
Move functions which are executed together into the
same source code module
Use inline expansion of small functions or DMPSX
Change the address of the function causing the cache
miss
This is usually done at the final stages of development
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Optimizing the CPU Process
Reduce I-Cache misses
Check switch blocks and structure of loops
Inner loop size should be less than 4kb
When necessary and possible, use multiple consecutive loops
instead of a single loop.
/* This may be slow if */
/* functions blow each */
/* other out of I-cache */
for( I = 0; I < 10; I++ )
{
function_a();
function_b();
function_c();
}
/* This may be faster */
for( I = 0; I < 10; I++ )
function_a();
for( I = 0; I < 10; I++ )
function_b();
for( I = 0; I < 10; I++ )
function_c();
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Optimizing the CPU Process
Reduce Read Accesses to main RAM
CPU stalls for 5 cycles on read access of RAM
Use the Scratchpad RAM area
Temporary work area
Permanent or temporary stack area
Eliminate unused arguments to LIBGTE functions by
using DMPSX instead.
Avoid multiple byte or short-word accesses to the
same long word address
8-bit, 16-bit, and 32-bit accesses all stall for 5 cycles.
Load the 32-bit long word and extract bytes & shorts from it.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Optimizing the CPU Process
Reduce Write Buffer Flush Penalties
Avoid alternating accesses such as READ, WRITE,
READ, WRITE, …
Change the order of instructions so that multiple
WRITE operations are executed together without
intervening READ operations.
Put instructions that do not access memory after
instructions which WRITE to memory.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Optimizing the GPU Process
Eliminate intervals without drawing
Reduce texture reads
Check CLUT switching
Reduce GPU preprocessing time
Eliminate unnecessary drawing
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
GPU Drawing Flowchart
Main RAM
DMA transfer
GPU
Preprocessing Drawing
Texture Cache
2KB
Video RAM
Pipeline processing time = Max(t(preprocessing), t(drawing) + t(texture cache fill))
Preprocessing time depends only on the polygon type. Drawing time is proportional to
drawing area. Texture cache fill time is proportional to texture cache miss ratio
In a real case, page-breaks of the video RAM and CLUT read penalties are added
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Eliminate Intervals Without Drawing
Eliminate NULL packets in ordering table
Check to see where background is registered
Are some OT entries always unused?
Use multiple ordering tables linked together
Use low-resolution main table and link in higher resolution
sub-tables
Use non-linear ordering tables
For example, an ordering table with 100 entries might be set up
so that:
Last 10 entries represent 50% of depth values farthest from
viewpoint
First 90 entries represent 50% of depth values closest to
viewpoint
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Eliminate Intervals Without Drawing
Check to see if start of drawing is delayed.
Is your program calling DrawOTag() as early as
possible?
If objects are somewhat pre-sorted, then:
Process farthest ones first, then call DrawOTag() for that batch.
Process remaining objects and call DrawOTag() again.
Use DrawSyncCallback() and VSyncCallback() to synchronize
drawing and buffer switching.
Remember that some portions of your game, like AI, don’t have
to be synchronized to VBLANK.
Use triple-buffering scheme if have available memory.
1: Frame being displayed
2: Frame drawn & ready to display at next VBLANK
3: Frame being drawn
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Eliminate Intervals Without Drawing
Modify graphics design to reduce completely
transparent texture areas.
Transparent pixels take just as long to process.
Watch out for textures with holes in them.
Don’t draw the hole!
Redo polygons in 3D model to go around holes.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Reduce Texture Reads
Use 4-bit textures instead of 8-bit or 16-bit
Effective cache size will be increased
More texture pixels will be loaded in one burst-read
Fastest access speed is obtained when the texture pixel data
can be read sequentially in the same order as the pixels being
drawn, even if the texture data doesn’t all fit in a single texture
window.
Allocate texture positions on cache size
boundaries
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Reduce Texture Reads
Use smaller textures for small polygons
Technique known as MIP-MAPPING
Avoid rotating textures if texture does not fit in
cache.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Check CLUT Switching
What is CLUT switching?
When a texture uses a different Color Look Up Table
from the previous texture.
Controlling CLUT switching is not easy in a Zsort architecture
Using 4-bit textures can require more CLUTs
Using 8-bit textures to get 256 colors can sometimes
give a better result because CLUT switching is not
required.
A burst-read access is no longer efficient for scaled-down
textures even if 4-bit mode is used.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Reduce GPU Preprocessing Time
Small polygons with scaled-down textures can
cause a preprocessing bottleneck.
Texture data cannot be read efficiently
Different Polygon types have different
preprocessing requirements
Gouraud-shaded textured
Gouraud Shading non-textured Flat-shaded textured
Flat-shaded non-textured
Preprocessing Time
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Eliminate Unnecessary Drawing
Back-face polygons
GPU preprocessing takes longer to draw from right to
left instead of left to right.
Texture reading must be done pixel by pixel.
Use two polygons & mirrored texture instead.
Place polygons back to back, one uses original texture, one
uses mirrored copy of original texture.
You can create mirrored texture on the fly at runtime.
Most back-face polygons should not be drawn
Hidden faces of objects overdrawn by other polygons anyway
Don’t draw polygons with surface normals having positive Z
components
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Eliminate Unnecessary Drawing
Zero-area polygons
GPU preprocessing takes longer.
Should be discarded before drawing begins.
Polygons outside the screen boundaries
Decreases GPU preprocessing performance
If CPU process faster than GPU process, apply CPU
clipping
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Eliminate Unnecessary Drawing
Polygons overlapping screen boundaries
Subdivide and apply CPU clipping
Polygons
overlapping top or
left side of screen
take as long to
draw as nonclipped polygons Polygons which
overlap bottom or
right side of
screen require
only processing
for non-clipped
portions
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Avoid Doubly-Drawn Backgrounds
Typically the entire background is drawn, then
certain portions such as the sky or ground are
overdrawn by other polygons
Don’t draw portions of the background you KNOW
are going to be covered up later by foreground objects.
Don’t use ClearImage() if you’re going to draw the
whole screen anyway.
Background
Sky
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Summary of Optimization Methods
Determine if optimizing the GPU process or CPU
process, or both, will make the most difference
Determine if the desired improvement can be
achieved without changing the basic paradigm.
Check the number of polygons to be displayed
Estimate data access time & processing time.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Summary of Optimization Methods
Tune the CPU process
Reduce data access penalties and I-cache misses
Make sure the R3000 write buffer is used effectively
Tune the GPU process
Check intervals where no drawing or data transfer
takes place.
Improve texture cache usage, maybe change texture
modes, Reduce GPU preprocessing time
Avoid unnecessary drawing of zero-area polygons,
unclipped polygons, doubly-drawn backgrounds...
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Using the Perfomance Analyzer
to Analyze PlayStation Programs
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
How to use the PA & Read the Results
Sample the data
Play the game until you get to the portion where
performance needs to be improved (i.e. where the
frame rate drops)
Trigger the data capture
Press the trigger button plugged into the DTL-H2700
Optionally have your program initiate the capture itself by
accessing a specific data location which means “trigger
performance analyzer NOW”
Interpret the data
View the graphic displays and information provided.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Information Provided by the PA
Bus Usage Analysis Graphs
Main RAM bus
Sub bus
Video RAM bus
GPU packet processing
RAM Access Penalties
Duplicate reads, write buffer flush
GPU Polygon rendering penalties
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Information Provided by the PA
Waveforms
Shows bus signals such as VBLANK
Symbol Access
Shows which symbols are being accessed for I-cache
burst reads or data reads & writes
Data Dump
Video RAM contents viewer
Statistics
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Main RAM BUS Analysis
Shows histogram of an amount of time spent for
each transaction type on the main RAM bus.
The less RED, GREEN, and YELLOW in the display,
the more efficient a CPU process is.
Running on cache while accessing the scratch pad RAM
results in the CPU staying off the main RAM bus.
1/60 sec 1/60 sec
Clock cycles
Red marks indicate
V-Blanks
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Sub BUS Analysis
Shows histogram of an amount of time spent for
each transaction type on the Sub-bus.
Used to identify the access to an I/O device, and helps
to identify interrupt processes too.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Video RAM BUS Analysis
Shows histogram of an amount of data
transferred in each transaction type on the video
RAM bus.
Used to tune a GPU process.
Higher patterns are, faster the data transfer is.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
GPU Packet Analysis
Shows histogram of GPU packets which are DMA
transferred to the GPU.
Used to identify polygon types and detect null packets.
Corresponding patterns on the video RAM bus
analysis are delayed.
This does NOT show timing of the CPU creating the
packets and linking them into the ordering table.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
RAM Access Penalties
Shows histogram of CPU stall cycles caused by
inefficient memory accesses.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
GPU Polygon Rendering Penalties
Shows histogram of each polygon penalty
Zero-area polygons
Back-face polygons
Polygons outside screen area
Polygons overlapping screen boundaries (scissoring)
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
How to Interpret the Analysis
Various phenomena
are shown as
specific patterns
Identify problems
and their causes by
locating and
inspecting those
patterns.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Start of a CPU Process
Spike-like dark
green pattern
DMA operation
performed by
ClearOTagR()
Drawing starts
on the video
RAM bus
analysis
Main CPU
process starts
after VBLANK
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
End of a CPU Process
The point where
VSync() is called
A stable
read/write
pattern
indicating a
polling loop,
such as done by
DrawSync() or
VSync() leading
up to VBLANK
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Start of a GPU Process
Drawing a
background
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
End of a GPU Process
The last drawing
done in a frame
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Instruction Cache Misses
Red area indicates
instruction burst
reads caused by
instruction cache
misses
The CPU stalls for
70%of the time
shown in red
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Instructions Running On-cache
Patterns without
red
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Processing Loops On-cache
A stable pattern
means a loop is
being processed.
Each iteration of
the loop can be
seen by enlarging
the display
One iteration
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
CPU Data Read and Write Cycles
Reading data from RAM by the CPU is colored
yellow.
Writing to RAM by the CPU is colored green.
The CPU does not stall if write buffer is not full.
Accessing the
scratchpad RAM
does not appear
on the main RAM
bus analysis.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Packets Transferred to GPU
A pink pattern in the main RAM bus analysis
indicates a GPU packet DMA transfer.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
NULL GPU Packets
A large pink lump
indicates that
successive NULL
packets are being
transferred
Blocks of successive
null packets are also
shown as a
continuous white
pattern in the video
RAM bus analysis
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Drawing a Background
The first drawing
pattern.
The height
(indic a ting
transfer rate) is
usually
cons is tent.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Efficient Drawing Pattern
A high green
pattern
Good gre en-to-red
ratio
Red indicates
texture cache
reads
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Inefficient Drawing Pattern
A low gre en
pattern
Poor green-to-red
ratio
Red indicates
texture cache
reads
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Drawing Semi-transparent Colors
Drawing of semitransparent pixe ls
requires a readmodify-write c yc le ,
shown in blue .
Shown with texture on
cache
The ove rall colored
area indic a tes the
sum of all reads and
write accesses .
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Relationship between GPU Packets
Processing & Video RAM Bus Accesses
In the video RAM bus analys is , drawing
patterns appear after the corresponding GPU
pac ket shown in the GPU pac ket analys is
display.
Delay due to pipeline process ing in the GPU
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
GPU Processing -vs- CPU Processing
Waiting in VSync function
CPU Processing
A red spike-like pattern
caused by the GPU
interruption to finish
drawing.
Since the GPU packets are transferred by DMA,
the pattern of the polling loops is jagged..
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Accessing the CD
DMA t r a n s f e r fr o m t he CD t o t he m a i Read i ng f r o m t he CD
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Accessing the MDEC
DMA t r a n s f e r fr o m m a i n RAM t o MDEC
( c o m p r essed da t a )
DMA t r a n s f e r fr o m
t he MDEC t o m a i n RAM
( u n c o m p r essed
d a t a )
No t e : An a c c ess t o t he MDEC i s no t sho w n i n
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Data Dump
Means a long-word access
Instruction
burst read
Function
names
Means texture
reads
Coordinates
in the video RAM
Data value
Instructions
Address
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Statistics — Main RAM Bus
Get Statistics for the duration of a CPU
process
Estimate CPU s tall c yc le s
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Statistics — GPU Packets
Get statistics for the
duration of a GPU process .
Look for NULL pa ckets
Che ck the number of
polygons for eac h type .
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Flow of Analysis
Sa m p l e da t a .
 a t t he scene w i t h a bo t t l eneck .
De t e r m i ne t he cause
Es t i m a t e t o t a l a m oun t o f
 i m p r ove m e n t s by t u n i n g
Can t he t a r g e t speed
be ach i eved ?
CPU o r GPU b o t t l eneck ?
Check t he a m oun t o f g l oba l d a t a accessand t he nu m b e r o f p o l ygons d r a w n .
Does i t ove r f l o w t h e
Pl a y St a t i on po w e r ?
Recons i d e r bas i c
p r o g r a m a l g o r i t h m sTr y be t t e r o b j e c t c l i p pm e t hods , change
g r aph i cs des i g n , e t Tune t he p r o g r a m
Mo d i f y t he da t a s t r u c t u r e
and a l g o r i t h m, cod i n g
s t y l e s , d r a w i ng m e t hod ,
e t c .
Ye s
No
No
Ye s
I nspec t hea vy r o u t i n e s
and heavy po r t i o n s i n d r a w i n g
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Optimization Strategy
Ass ign a priority to eac h me thod of
optimization, and apply only those whic h are
necessa ry.
S tart with the optimization whic h should provide
the most significant improvement.
It is enough to get the targe t speedup?
Put emphasis on portions where great
improvements are expected with less work.
A small loop with many iterations , which takes
long time to be processed.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Optimization Strategy
Che ck to see if the targe t speed is ac hievable
afte r performing eac h improvement.
For example, the CPU can not run faster than the
level where no cache miss occurs, so figure out
potential improvement gained just by eliminating
cache miss.
If the CPU process takes s ignificantly longer than
the GPU process, then optimizing the GPU
process won’t have muc h effec t on your game’s
framerate. Or vice versa.
Estimation of speedup is important!
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
How to Sample Program Execution
Push the trigger button connected to the
bac k of the DTL-H2700
Can also use the Trigger func tion.
Resetting the Sample Range
Once you’ve captured data and determined whic h
range makes up a complete game frame, change
the sampling range in the Options dialog box
Download the data again without re-triggering by
us ing the Read Data Only menu option
Eliminates unnecessa ry sample data.
The PA software will run fas ter with less data to examine.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Using Set Trigger Condition
Spec ify trigger address, function name, data
value , and how many video frames BEFORE
trigger condition to sample.
Setting the trigger address
to a function such as
DrawOTag enables sampling
to synchronize with the start
of a game frame.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Capturing Where the Frame Rate Drops
S e t the trigger
address to a
variable named
ReqTrigger
If ReqTrigger is
accessed, PA will
trigger capture of
data
Many types of
phenomena c an
be c aptured
under program
control
/* frame length in H count
 (needs an adjustment) */
#define HCountThreshold 525
volatile long ReqTrigger;
main()
{
 for(;;) /* main loop */
 {
 /* compare H-counts since */
 /* the last Vsync exited */
 if( VSync(1) > HCountThreshold )
 ReqTrigger = 0;
 VSync(0);
 ...
 }
}
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Examples of Analysis
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
How to Use Statistics
Get total s tatis tic a l amount for eac h of CPU
and GPU processes .
Estimate total amount of CPU s tall c yc le s .
How much improvement can be achieved at most
by eliminating cache miss, etc.
Che ck the number of GPU pac kets being
processed.
Is it ove rloading the GPU?
Too many small polygons with large textures whic h take
long time in preprocess ing?
Too many backface, offscreen, or partially-clipped
polygons which take long time in preprocess ing?
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
How to Use Statistics
Get a statis tic a l amount in a partic ular range .
S tatis tics at particular iterations .
This will give how muc h improvement c an be achieved
eliminating cache miss, etc.
S tatis tics at a portion where drawing is ineffic ient.
Because of the number of polygons?
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Finding Code Causing I-cache Misses
Che ck loop process ing patterns with red
areas
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Finding Code Causing I-cache Misses
De termine es timate of CPU s tall c yc les caus t
by I-cache burst reads
Stall cycles
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Finding Code Causing I-cache Misses
Read the symbol file & show symbol accesses
Two functions cause
cache miss alternately.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Finding Code Causing I-cache Misses
Cac he line = 2nd & 3rd least signific ant hex
digits of ins truc tion address
Same cache line
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Identifying Functions Running on
Cache
Func tion names not shown in symbol list
Use Search func tion to look bac kwards for Icache burs t read
Choose Inst Burst Read
Search backward
Which function
is running?
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Identifying Functions Running on
Cache
Enc lose red
portion with
markers, and
extra c t func tion
names which
c aus ed I-cache
miss . Function names
Shown as red
(The same color as the
main RAM bus analysis)
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Efficient Analysis Using Search
Various searc h me thods
Main RAM Bus
by transaction type, by
address or symbol
Sub Bus
by transaction type, by
address
Video RAM Bus
by transaction type, by
coordinates
Others
by GPU pac ket type , by
wave form event, by
penaltie s
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Inspecting Read/Write Accesses
Us ing the markers,
enclose a portion of large
red or green area, then
display the only accessed
symbols .
CPU s talls for 5 cyc les in
each data read access to
the main RAM!
Use c oding s tyles suc h
that re sult in few read
accesses .
Tune s tac k accesses .
Che c k for duplic a te
reads of global data.
Use of joint-ve rtex mode l
Frequent accesses
to this symbol
(or stack)
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Inspecting Read/Write Accesses
Effic ient use of the
s c ratc h pad RAM
Use DMPSX toge ther.
Alloc a te a stack space
on the sc ratch pad
RAM.
Alloc a te heavily
accessed work areas
on the sc ratch pad
RAM.
Frequent accesses
to this symbol
(or stack)
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Duplicate Reads
Duplicate reads are
shown as red stripes
Indic a tes CPU s tall
time
Conc entrate on large
areas
Access interval
threshold can be
specified in Options
dialog
S e t lowe r values to
highlight problem
areas
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Duplicate Reads
Us ing the Search
command, searc h
bac kwards for an
access to same
address
Double click the red
stripe and check
the address
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Duplicate Reads
Duplicate reads
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Write Buffer Flush Penalty
Write Buffer
Penalties are
shown as red
s tripe s
Indicates CPU
s tall time
Conc entrate on
large areas
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Write Buffer Flush Penalty
Partic ularly improve points
whe re read and write
accesses appear alte rnately.
Exc hange the order of the
read and write if poss ible.
Move other non-memoryaccess ins truc tions to jus t
after the s tore ins truc tion.
Note: All flush penalties don’t
necessa rily mean the CPU is
s talling.
In the main RAM bus analysis
if an access takes place just
after the write buffer has
finished flushing, a penalty is
displayed.
The CPU might be exe cuting
next non-memory-access
ins truc tions in between.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Write Buffer Flush Penalty
There is a read
access jus t
afte r the write.
Exe cuting four
success ive
s tore
ins truc tions
results in most
e ffic ient
process ing
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Detecting NULL GPU Packets
Null packets cause the
CPU to stall because the main
RAM bus is busy very often.
The GPU is idle
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Detecting NULL GPU Packets
Too many NULL
pac kets hurts
performanc e
S lows down the
CPU be c ause the
main RAM bus is
busy
Wastes the GPU’s
time
Too many
null packets
are seen.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Checking Ordering Table Resolution
Many null packets
are seen.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Checking Ordering Table Resolution
Process ing is
s lowed if
orde ring table
resolution is too
high
A lump of null packets
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Checking Background Drawing
Enclose the range
for the background
using the markers
Few packets are shown
for drawing a background
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Checking Background Drawing
De tect doubly-drawn areas using the video
RAM viewer
Drawing on the screen area
Doubly drawn Texture
Colors indicate access frequency
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Inefficient Drawing
Why are green
patterns low?
Most of the cause
Texture cache miss
Preprocess ing
bottleneck
Small polygons
Other causes
Ordering Table too large
Clipping
Transparent colors
Ve rtic a lly long polygons
Page fault penalties on
the video RAM
We’ll enlarge
this section
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Inefficient Drawing
Many texture cache misses
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Characteristics of the Texture Cache
2KB dire c t-mapped cache with 6 bits in each
tag
Cac he size in pixels, the number of cache lines
4-bit texture :64x64 texels , 64x4 line s
8-bit texture :64x32 texels , 64x4 line s
16-bit texture: 32x32 texels , 32x8 line s
Line s ize : 64 bits
The number of texels (texture-pixels) loaded one at
a time horizontally in the burs t mode when texture
cache miss occurs
4-bit texture : 16 texe ls
8-bit texture : 8 texels
16-bit texture: 4 texels
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Characteristics of the Texture Cache
Texture page size : 256 x 256 texels
The texture cache is flushed every time when a
new texture page is accessed.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Comparing Texture Modes
Performing
16 flattexture
mappings
with 64x64
texture s ize .
4-bit texture
(on cache)
16-bit texture
8-bit texture
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Comparing Texture Modes
A very low
transfer
rate results
when
texture
reads
oc c ur.
4-bit texture (on cache)
16-bit texture
8-bit texture
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Techniques for Fast Texture Mapping
Divide the ordering table if pos s ible
Use a different ordering table for polygons whic h
use the same texture.
The ground and floor usually use repeated texture. The
orde ring table is eas ily divided for suc h obje c ts , too.
Divide the ordering table based on texture pages.
The texture cache is flushed eve ry time when a new
texture page is accessed.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Techniques for Fast Texture Mapping
If texture is mapped reduc ing its s ize , 4-bit
texture mode also becomes slow.
Use mip-mapping
If mapping with reducing texture size is inevitable,
us ing 8 or 16-bit texture mode do not slow down
drawing speed a lot.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Techniques for Fast Texture Mapping
Do not place a large te xture data rotating at
90 degrees if it doesn’t fit in the texture cache
s ize .
Divide polygons into smaller ones.
Prepare polygons for eac h rotation.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Inspecting Texture Cache Miss Causes
On the video RAM bus analys is , use the
markers to enc lose a portion to inspect.
Use the video RAM viewer to inspect the
c aus e , then check the following.
Ratio of texture data read to polygon pixels written
Reduc ing/expanding in texture mapping.
Enlarged textures drawn e ffic iently, but may look
pixe lated
Reduc ed textures not drawn e ffic iently
Ratio of texture data read to polygon pixels written
, and the access frequency (shown as colors)
Cac he-hit ratio
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Inspecting Texture Cache Miss Causes
Use the video RAM viewer to inspect the
c aus e , then check the following.
Accessed texture locations , Texture pages
Frequency of cache flushing
Roughness of horizontal lines in texture area
Reduc ing fac tor
The shape of an accessed texture area pattern,
reading dire c tion
S hape of texture data, rotated polygons
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Texture Cache Missing not a Problem
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Texture Cache Missing not a Problem
No interruption
in drawing
results in high
drawing speed
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Texture Cache Missing not a Problem
Viewing in the video RAM display
Effic ient drawing be c ause of expanded texture
Polygons drawn
Texture CLUT
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Frequent Texture Cache Misses
Examine details
of just a few
polygons
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Frequent Texture Cache Misses
Cac he misses
mean many
interruptions in
drawing, resulting
in low drawing
speed
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Frequent Texture Cache Misses
Inspecting in the video RAM viewer
Ineffic ient drawing due to reduc ed magnific a tion of texture
data.
Read accesses appearing as horizontal s tripe s
Vertic a lly they are not continuous.
Polygons drawn
Texture
Enlarged
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Mip-Mapping -vs- not Mip-Mapping
Even if 4-bit texture
mode is used to
inc rease effe c tive
texture cache s ize,
reduc ing a texture
when drawing a
polygon results in
unused texels being
loaded on the cache,
therefore the burs t
read is no longer
effe c tive.
For example, drawing a
20x20 polygon that
uses a 64x64 texture
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Mip-Mapping -vs- not Mip-Mapping
Mip-mapping can take advantage of the 4-bit
texture mode avoiding shrunk te xture
mapping.
Reduced to 50%!
This also solves
an alias ing
problem in
texture
mapping faraway polygons .
Reduces
texture c rawl
and flic ker.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Polygons with Transparent Areas
No green pattern
while drawing a polygon
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Polygons with Transparent Areas
A transparent color takes the same amount of
drawing time as a non-transparent color.
A polygon with
a transparent
color Texture
If
transparent
area is
large, divide
the polygon
to inc rease
the
performanc
e.
Don’t draw
the hole !
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Frequent CLUT Switching
Frequent CLUT
switc hing slows
down drawing
speed.
Use a separate
ordering table for
each CLUT if
poss ible.
8-bit CLUT
switching is
taking place
very often
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
GPU Preprocessing Bottlenecks
Small polygons
with reduc ed
textures have long
pre-process ing
times whic h
de c rease
performanc e .
For example,
POLY_GT4
Inve s tigate
changing the
polygon type to flatshaded and/or nontextured if Z is
large.
Intervals are the same
regardless of drawing area
(preprocessing time)
Triangle Gouraud
texture mapping
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Polygon Penalties
S e t the sc reen s ize and drawing
offs e t value s .
S e t them in the option dialog
box.
Inspect a point with many
polygon penalties, then identify
the polygon us ing the video
memory viewer.
If too many back-face polygon
penalties are shown, toggle its
s e tting in the option dialog box.
Some programs use both bac k
and front face polygons
In the mesh data, the vertex
orde r and the face of the
polygon do not matc h, the refore
the penalty is not shown
correctly.
Scissoring
penalty
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Polygon Penalties
If drawing speed is low because of polygon
penaltie s ,
Perform c lipping if there is a margin left in a CPU
process .
When scissoring penalties cannot be ignored, use
small polygons, partic ularly around the sc reen
boundaries .
Perform normal c lipping to discard zero-area
polygons and bac k-face polygons.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Example of Optimizing a Program
Texture address modulation
The texture address calc ulated from normal
ve c tor.
It mus t maintain 30 fps
An improvement from 12 x 12 rectangle mesh
to 15 x 15!
About 50 %
improvement in
divis ion ratio
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Example of Optimizing a Program
Us ing the 15x15
me sh
DMPSX is already
employed.
Both CPU and
GPU don’t finish
in two VBLANK
periods . Overflowed
Many data accesses
(Identified as stack
access)
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Example of Optimizing a Program
In the detected
routine , the c ode
was modified so
that the sc ratc h
pad RAM would
be used as a
s tac k.
CPU now
finishes in less
than two
VBLANK
periods .
GPU still overflows
a little bit
Write buffer flush
penalties reduced
CPU processing time shortened
due to fewer data accesses
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Example of Optimizing a Program
The orde ring
table was divided
into two tables so
that the hit ratio
of the texture
cache would
inc rease.
Both CPU and
GPU finish in less
than two VBLANK
periods !
Performance of
texture cache was
improved, resulting in
fast drawing.
Now running at
30 frames/sec!
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Known Problems
If the CPU is running on cache, it is hard to tell exe cuting
loc a tions in a program.
Make a good guess from the patterns of data access symbols .
The symbol file does not contain stac k information.
S e t the s tack range in the option dialog box.
Use the -Xm option with c c ps x to generate a map file , since the DSM
file output by dumps ym has no information about the s tac k
segment.
When an I-cac he miss occurs at an address in whic h the leas t four
s ignific ant bits are ‘C’, the main RAM bus analys is identifies the
transaction as a CPU data read c yc le.
In such a case, even though an ins truc tion cache miss occurred, only
one long-word is read from the main RAM. Therefore there is no way to
dis tinguish this instruc tion burs t read c yc le from CPU’s data read
c yc les.
Care must be taken when searing for an ins truc tion burs t read
transac tion in the search command espe c ially when an address is
specified.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Tracing Unusual Phenomena
The PA c an analyze unusual phenomena suc h
as hang-ups .
Trace the route to hang-up
Very common cases
Forgetting initialization of library func tions
Wrong orde r of c a lling InitPad() and InitCard().
An uninitialized drive r de s troys the c ode area in a
c a llbac k routine.
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Tracing Unusual Phenomena
Very common cases
S tac k overflow in the sc ratc h pad RAM.
Results in a bus e rror.
Infinite loops & waiting for callbac ks whic h never
oc cur.
Forgetting to call ExitCriticalSec tion() after calling
EnterCriticalSec tion().
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Tracing Unusual Phenomena
Record accessed address and data
values when hang-up occurred.
Set trigger conditions to those values.
Then set NFV larger than two, and the
sampling range larger than NFV.
Try another value as
the trigger condition
If earlier ones are needed,
continue the procedure
and trace the phenomenon.
YES
NO
Restart the program.
Do sampling.
Got a shot where
the program just
hung up?
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Evaluating Algorithms
Evaluation of a core engine , and improving its
performanc e .
Evaluation when introduc ing new data
s truc ture and algorithms
For example, employing joint-vertex mesh data
Evaluation at an early stage of the design,
and its use at a graphics des ign s tage.
Balanc ing the graphics de s ign and algorithm
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Summary
Visualization of process ing by us ing the
performance analyzer.
Analys is by the programme r and its use as an
analys is tool
Effe c tive use of various kinds of commands to
identify the c ause of process ing bottlenecks
Various kinds of analyses
S tatis tic s
Video memory viewer
S ymbol access
Trigger func tion, Searc h command
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Summary
Estimating improvements and determining
the tuning strategy
Optimimzation
Use for evaluation of algorithms , and its use
for graphics des ign
Adding more features suc h as improvements
in graphics qualities when the CPU and GPU
have more bandwidth left.
Introduc ing mip-mapping
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
Summary
Use as an experimental tool at an early stage
in a design phase
Use ful data in dis cuss ion be tween
programmers and graphics des igne rs in a
group work
Use as a monitoring tool to e xamine unusual
phenomena
CONFIDENTIAL PlayStation Developer Seminar / Summer ‘97 / DTL-H2700 Dev System and Performance Analyzer
The End