
CDROM File Video Streaming Framerate	Contents
Index	Prev
Next

According to Sony, BS encoded 320x240pix videos can be played at 30fps (with cdrom running at double speed).

STR Frame Rate
As a general rule, the frame rate is implied in CDROM rotation speed (150 or 75 sectors per second, minus the audio sectors, divided by the number of sectors per video frame).

Fixed/Variable Framerates
The frame can drop on video frames that contain more sectors than usually. Video frames that require fewer sectors than often padded with zerofilled sectors. However, some games don't have that padding, so they could end up reeceiving up to 150 single-sector frames per second; the actual framerate is supposedly slowed down to 60Hz or less via Vblank timer (and with the CDROM reading getting paused when the read-ahead buffer gets full).

Audio Samplerate
XA-ADPCM audio contains samplerate info (in the FORM2 subheader), the samplerate versus amount of audio sectors can be used to compute the CDROM rotation speed.
There are two exceptions: Some movies don't have any audio at all, and some movies use SPU-ADPCM instead of XA-ADPCM. In the latter case, the SPU Pitch (samplerate) may (or may not) be found somewhere in the audio sector headers.

CDROM Rotation speed
As said above, the speed can be often detected via audio sample rate. Otherwise, the general rule is that most PSX games are used 2x speed (150 sectors/second). But, there are a few games with 1x speed (see below).

CDROM Single speed (75 sectors/frame)
Here are probably most of the USA games with videos at 1x speed.
  007 - The World Is Not Enough
  1Xtreme
  Arcade Party Pak
  Atari Anniversary Edition Redux
  Blast Radius
  Blue's Clues - Blue's Big Musical
  Chessmaster II
  Chronicles of the Sword
  Civilization II
  Colin McRae Rally
  Creatures - Raised in Space
  Cyberia
  Demolition Racer
  Dune 2000
  ESPN Extreme Games
  FIFA Soccer 97
  Fade to Black
  Family Connection - A Guide to Lightspan
  Fear Effect
  Fox Hunt
  Interactive CD Sampler Volume 1
  Jade Cocoon - Story of the Tamamayu
  Jeopardy! 2nd Edition
  Juggernaut
  Krazy Ivan
  MTV Sports - Skateboarding featuring Andy Macdonald
  MTV Sports - T.J. Lavin's Ultimate BMX
  Medal of Honor
  Medal of Honor - Underground
  Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine Demo Disc 23
  Planet of the Apes
  PlayStation Underground Number 2
  Shockwave Assault
  Starblade Alpha
  Starwinder - The Ultimate Space Race
  Str.at.e.s. 1 - Match-A-Batch
  Str.at.e.s. 5 - Parallel Lives!
  Str.at.e.s. 7 - Riddle Roundup!
  The X-Files
  Top Gun - Fire at Will!
  Um Jammer Lammy
  Uprising X
  Wheel of Fortune - 2nd Edition
  Williams Arcade's Greatest Hits


I am homeless in Hamburg, please help me out!
extracted from no$psx v2.2 - homepage - patreon - whole doc htm/txt - copyright 2022 martin korth (nocash)
