Sound Artist Tool
© 1998 Sony Computer Entertainment Inc.
Publication date: August 1998
Sony Computer Entertainment America
919 E. Hillsdale Blvd., 2nd floor
Foster City, CA 94404
Sony Computer Entertainment Europe
Waverley House
7-12 Noel Street
London W1V 4HH, England
The Sound Artist Tool manual is supplied pursuant to and subject to the terms of the Sony Computer
Entertainment PlayStation® License and Development Tools Agreements, the Licensed Publisher
Agreement and/or the Licensed Developer Agreement.
The Sound Artist Tool manual is intended for distribution to and use by only Sony Computer Entertainment
licensed Developers and Publishers in accordance with the PlayStation® License and Development Tools
Agreements, the Licensed Publisher Agreement and/or the Licensed Developer Agreement.
Unauthorized reproduction, distribution, lending, rental or disclosure to any third party, in whole or in part,
of this book is expressly prohibited by law and by the terms of the Sony Computer Entertainment
PlayStation® License and Development Tools Agreements, the Licensed Publisher Agreement and/or the
Licensed Developer Agreement.
Ownership of the physical property of the book is retained by and reserved by Sony Computer
Entertainment. Alteration to or deletion, in whole or in part, of the book, its presentation, or its contents is
prohibited.
The information in the Sound Artist Tool manual is subject to change without notice. The content of this
book is Confidential Information of Sony Computer Entertainment.
PlayStation and PlayStation logos are registered trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. All other
trademarks are property of their respective owners and/or their licensors.
Sound Artist Tool
Table of Contents
List of Figures iii
List of Tables v
About This Manual vii
Changes Since Last Release vii
Related Documentation vii
Manual Structure vii
Developer Reference Series vii
Typographic Conventions viii
Developer Support ix
Chapter 1: Overview
Operating Rules 1-2
Features 1-2
System Configuration and Music Creation 1-3
Chapter 2: Installation
Setting up DTL-H800 2-3
Installing DTL-S810 2-4
Testing System 2-5
Chapter 3: Tutorials
Creating Sound Data for PlayStation Unit 3-3
SMF2SEQ - Creating Sequence Data 3-4
AIFF2VAG - Creating Waveform Data 3-6
VAG Player - Reproduces Waveform Data 3-8
SoundDelicatessen-Implements Sound Source Data 3-9
RAW2DA - Creates CD-DA Data 3-20
RAW2XA - Creates CD-ROM XA Voice Data 3-21
Reproduction by DTL-H2000 3-22
Chapter 4: References
Sound File Formats 4-3
Commands and Names of Window Components 4-9
Supporting MIDI in Sound Library 4-25
List of Figures
Figure 1–1: Example of Music Creation Environment 1-4
Figure 1–2: Macintosh 1-5
Figure 1–3: PC/AT-compatible machine 1-5
Figure 2–1: Installing Board 2-3
Figure 2–2: Installing Software 2-4
Figure 2–3: Error Message Panel 2-5
Figure 2–4: “SoundBoard” Menu 2-6
Figure 2–5: “Keyboard” Window 2-6
Figure 3–1: SMF Output in Performer 3-4
Figure 3–2: SMF2SEQ File Menu 3-5
Figure 3–3: SMF2SEQ 3-5
Figure 3–4: SMF2SEQ Deleted Messages 3-5
Figure 3–5: SMF2SEQ Mode Menu 3-6
Figure 3–6: AIFF Output in SoundDesignerII 3-6
Figure 3–7: AIFF2VAG File Menu 3-7
Figure 3–8: AIFF2VAG Conversion File 3-7
Figure 3–9: AIFF2VAG Compression Mode Menu 3-7
Figure 3–10: AIFF2VAG Conversion Mode Menu 3-8
iv Table of Contents
Sound Artist Tool
Figure 3–11: Dialog Box for Dragging and Dropping VAG Player Icon 3-8
Figure 3–12: VAB Structure 3-9
Figure 3–13: Example of VAB 3-9
Figure 3–14: Message Displayed during SoundDelicatessen Startup 3-10
Figure 3–15: Error Message Panel during SoundDelicatessen Startup 3-10
Figure 3–16: Dialog Box after Board Initialization 3-10
Figure 3–17: SoundDelicatessen Program List Window 3-11
Figure 3–18: SoundDelicatessen Tone List Window 3-12
Figure 3–19: SoundDelicatessen VAG List Window 3-12
Figure 3–20: Cataloging to SoundDelicatessen VAG List 3-13
Figure 3–21: Setting SoundDelicatessen Tone Attributes 3-13
Figure 3–22: Keyboard Window 3-14
Figure 3–23: Dialog Box for Saving SoundDelicatessen File 3-14
Figure 3–24: ADSR Setting Window 3-15
Figure 3–25: Dialog Box for Saving SoundDelicatessen File 3-16
Figure 3–26: DEVICE Setting Example in Performer 5.02 3-17
Figure 3–27: Setting SoundDelicatessen Reverb 3-18
Figure 3–28: Printing Option Dialog Box 3-19
Figure 3–29: Printing Setting Dialog Box 3-19
Figure 3–30: Printing Dialog Box 3-20
Figure 3–31: “Format” Menu 3-22
Figure 3–32: Monitor Output of Sample Program 3-23
Figure 4–1: SEQ Format 4-3
Figure 4–2: SEP Format 4-4
Figure 4–3: VAG Format 4-5
Figure 4–4: VAB Format 4-6
Figure 4–5: VAB Program Attribute Table 4-6
Figure 4–6: VAB Tone Attribute Table 4-7
Figure 4–7: VH Format 4-7
Figure 4–8: VB Format 4-8
Figure 4–9: DA Format 4-8
Figure 4–10: SMF2SEQ Panel 4-9
Figure 4–11: SMF2SEQ: “File” Menu 4-9
Figure 4–12: SMF2SEF File Selection Dialog Box 4-9
Figure 4–13: SMF2SEQ: SEQ File Specification Dialog Box 4-9
Figure 4–14: SMF2SEQ "Output Mode" Menu 4-10
Figure 4–15: AIFF2VAG Panel 4-10
Figure 4–16: AIFF2VAG: “File” Menu 4-10
Figure 4–17: AIFF2VAG: AIFF File Selection Dialog Box 4-11
Figure 4–18: AIFF2VAG: Conversion Panel 4-11
Figure 4–19: AIFF2VAG: VAG File Specification Dialog Box 4-11
Figure 4–20: AIFF2VAG: “Compression” Menu 4-12
Figure 4–21: AIFF2VAG "Mode" Menu 4-12
Figure 4–22: AIFF2VAG Playback Confirmation Panel 4-13
Figure 4–23: VAG Player Panel 4-13
Figure 4–24: VAG Player: “File” Menu 4-13
Figure 4–25: VAG Player: VAG File Selection Dialog Box 4-13
Figure 4–26: VAG Player: Dialog box for dragging and dropping 4-14
Figure 4–27: SoundDelicatessen Panel 4-14
Figure 4–28: SoundDelicatessen: “File” menu 4-14
Figure 4–29: SoundDelicatessen: Program list window 4-15
Figure 4–30: SoundDelicatessen: Program Import 4-15
Figure 4–31: SoundDelicatessen: Program Export 4-16
Figure 4–32: SoundDelicatessen: Print setting dialog box 4-16
Figure 4–33: SoundDelicatessen Printer Dialog Box 4-17
Figure 4–34: SoundDelicatessen: Print option dialog box 4-17
Table of Contents v
Sound Artist Tool
Figure 4–35: SoundDelicatessen: “Edit” menu 4-18
Figure 4–36: SoundDelicatessen: “Windows” menu 4-19
Figure 4–37: SoundDelicatessen: Tone list window 4-19
Figure 4–38: SoundDelicatessen: ADSR setting window 4-20
Figure 4–39: SoundDelicatessen: VAG list window 4-20
Figure 4–40: SoundDelicatessen: Keyboard window 4-21
Figure 4–41: SoundDelicatessen: “SoundBoard” menu 4-21
Figure 4–42: SoundDelicatessen: “DSP” menu 4-22
Figure 4–43: RAW2A Panel 4-23
Figure 4–44: RAW2DA: “File” menu 4-23
Figure 4–45: RAW2DA: “OutputMode” menu 4-23
Figure 4–46: RAW2XA Panel 4-24
Figure 4–47: RAW2XA: “File” menu 4-24
Figure 4–48: RAW2XA: “Format” menu 4-24
Figure 4–49: RAW2XA: “OutputMode” menu 4-25
List of Tables
Table 1–1: Sound Data Formats 1-2
Table 1–2: PlayStation Sound Formats 1-3
Table 1–3: Equipment Needed for Creation Environment 1-4
Table 3–1: PlayStation Sound Formats 3-3
Table 3–2: Applications Supported 3-3
Table 3–3: Supported DOS Applications 3-3
Table 3–4: Appropriate Format (SMF) 3-4
Table 3–5: SoundDelicatessen Reverb Type 3-18
Table 3–6: Control Pad Keys 3-23
Table 4–1: Reverb Types 4-22
Table 4–2: Data Descriptions 4-26
Table 4–3: Vibration Types 4-26
Table 4–4: Reverb Type 4-26
Table 4–5: Repetition Functions 4-27
Table 4–6: Marking Function 4-27
vi Table of Contents
Sound Artist Tool
Sound Artist Tool
About This Manual
This manual is the latest release of instructions relating to the Sound Artist Tool for the PlayStation® as of
Run-Time Library release 4.3. The purpose of this manual is (1) to provide installation and operation
instructions for the DTL-H800 Sound Artist Board and (2) to explain how to use the Sound Artist Tool
software.
Changes Since Last Release
There have been no substantial changes to this document since its last release.
Related Documentation
Developers should use this manual in conjunction with Run-Time Library release 4.3.
Manual Structure
Section Description
Ch. 1: Overview Describes the Sound Artist Board and Sound
Artist Tool in general terms and explains system
requirements for startup.
Ch. 2: Installation Describes steps for setting up and testing the
Sound Artist Board and Sound Artist Tool.
Ch. 3: Tutorials Describes the following six applications to
develop a procedure for creating sound data:
1. SMF2SEQ (Sequence data converter);
2. AIFF2VAG (Waveform data converter);
3. VAG Player (Waveform data reproduction
tool);
4. SoundDelicatessen (Tool for creating and
reproducing sound source);
5. RAW2DA (CD-DA data creation tool);
6. RAW2XA (CD-ROM XA audio data encoder).
Ch. 4: References Provides sound file formats, tool commands,
and names of window components.
Developer Reference Series
This manual is part of the Developer Reference Series, a series of technical reference volumes covering all
aspects of PlayStation development. The complete series is listed below:
Manual Description
PlayStation Hardware Describes the PlayStation hardware architecture
and overviews its subsystems.
PlayStation Operating System Describes the PlayStation operating system and
related programming fundamentals.
Run-Time Library Overview Describes the structure and purpose of the
run-time libraries provided for PlayStation
software development.
Run-Time Library Reference Defines all available PlayStation run-time library
functions, macros and structures.
Inline Programming Reference Describes in-line programming using DMPSX,
GTE inline macro and GTE register information.
viii About This Manual
Sound Artist Tool
SDevTC Development Environment Describes the SDevTC (formerly "Psy-Q")
Development Environment for PlayStation
software development.
3D Graphics Tools Describes how to use the PlayStation 3D
Graphics Tools, including the animation and
material editors.
Sprite Editor Describes the Sprite Editor tool for creating
sprite data and background picture
components.
Sound Artist Tool Provides installation and operation instructions
for the DTL-H800 Sound Artist Board and
explains how to use the Sound Artist Tool
software.
File Formats Describes all native PlayStation data formats.
Data Conversion Utilities Describes all available PlayStation data
conversion utilities, including both stand-alone
and plug-in programs.
CD Emulator Provides installation and operation instructions
for the CD Emulator subsystem and related
software.
CD-ROM Generator Describes how to use the CD-ROM Generator
software to write CD-R discs.
Performance Analyzer User Guide Provides general instructions for using the
Performance Analyzer software.
Performance Analyzer Technical Reference Describes how to measure software
performance and interpret the results using the
Performance Analyzer.
DTL-H2000 Installation and Operation Provides installation and operation instructions
for the DTL-H2000 Development System.
DTL-H2500/2700 Installation and Operation Provides installation and operation instructions
for the DTL-H2500/H2700 Development
Systems.
Typographic Conventions
Certain Typographic Conventions are used through out this manual to clarify the meaning of the text. The
following conventions apply to all narrative text except for structure and function descriptions:
Convention Meaning
courier Indicates literal program code.
Bold Indicates a document, chapter or section title.
The following conventions apply within structure and function descriptions only:
Convention Meaning
Medium Bold Denotes structure or function types and names.
Italic Denotes function arguments and structure members.
About This Manual ix
Sound Artist Tool
Developer Support
Sony Computer Entertai Computer Entertai Computer Entertai Computer Entertainment America (SCEA ment America (SCEA) ment America (SCEA ment America (SCEA)
SCEA developer support is available to licensees in North America only. You may obtain developer support
or additional copies of this documentation by contacting the following addresses:
Order Information Developer Support
In North AmericaIn North America In North America In North America In North America In North AmericaIn North America In North America
Attn: Developer Tools Coordinator E-mail: DevTech_Support@playstation.sony.com
Sony Computer Entertainment America Web: http://www.scea.sony.com/dev
919 East Hillsdale Blvd., 2nd floor Developer Support Hotline: (650) 655-8181
Foster City, CA 94404 (Call Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.,
Tel: (650) 655-8000 PST/PDT)
Sony Computer Entertai Computer Entertai Computer Entertai Computer Entertainment Europe (SCEE) ment Europe (SCEE ment Europe (SCEE ment Europe (SCEE)
SCEE developer support is available to licensees in Europe only. You may obtain developer support or
additional copies of this documentation by contacting the following addresses:
Order Information Developer Support
In EuropeIn Europe In Europe In Europe In Europe In EuropeIn Europe In Europe
Attn: Production Coordinator E-mail: dev_support@playstation.co.uk
Sony Computer Entertainment Europe Web: https://www-s.playstation.co.uk
Waverley House Developer Support Hotline:
7-12 Noel Street +44 (0) 171 447 1680
London W1V 4HH (Call Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.,
Tel: +44 (0) 171 447 1600 GMT or BST/BDT)
x About This Manual
Sound Artist Tool
Sound Artist Tool
Chapter 1:
Overview
1-2 Overview
Sound Artist Tool
Operating Rules
The Sound Artist Board and Sound Artist Tool are applications which are activated by Macintosh OS and
follow Macintosh rules of operation. This manual is designed for the user who is familiar with Macintosh
operation, so no explanation is provided for general Macintosh issues. Please refer to the Macintosh User’s
Manual for details.
Features
The PlayStation Sound Artist Board (DTL-H800, hereafter referred to as the PlayStation Sound Board) and
the PlayStation Sound Artist Tool (DTL-S810, hereafter referred to as the PlayStation Sound Tool) are
applications executed on Apple Macintosh. They are tools for creating sound data for the PlayStation.
Using the tools along with existing sound tools enables music creation for the PlayStation.
The following are other features of the PlayStation Sound Tool:
• Sound chip SPU for the PlayStation is mounted.
The PlayStation Sound Board is equipped with the same sound chip (SPU) as the PlayStation and with
a sound source memory of 4 M-bits (= 512 k-bytes). Hence, sound data equivalent to data for the
PlayStation can be reproduced on Macintosh. The SPU is provided with DSP for reverb effect
implementation.
• Optical digital output is covered.
The PlayStation Sound Board is equipped with a square optical digital output terminal (TOSLINK). The
terminal allows data creation in a high-quality music reproduction environment.
• FreeMIDI is supported.
The Sound Board driver included in the PlayStation Sound Tool is compatible with the FreeMIDI
System (ver.1.26 ~ ) advocated by Mark of the Unicorn Co. The Sound Tool can be operated directly
from sequencer software and the MIDI keyboard.
• Standard MIDI File (SMF) and Audio Interchange File Format (AIFF) are supported.
The Sound Tool supports SMF and AIFF as source data and is highly compatible with other general
sound tools.
File Formats
The PlayStation Sound Tool supports the following sound data formats.
Table 1–1: Sound Data Formats
Data format Definition
SMF Standard MIDI File (Format 1)
AIFF 16-bit Audio Interchange File Format
(AIFF)
SDII SoundDesignerII File Format
The PlayStation Sound Tool supports the following sound formats for the PlayStation.
Overview 1-3
Sound Artist Tool
Table 1–2: PlayStation Sound Formats
Sound format Definition
SEQ PlayStation sound sequence format
VAG PlayStation waveform format
VAB PlayStation wave bank format
DA PlayStation CD-DA format
XA PlayStation CD-ROM XA audio channel format
SEP PlayStation sound sequence chuck format
VH PlayStation wave bank header format
VB PlayStation wave bank body format
The XA format supported by RAW2XA is based on the following specifications:
CD-ROM XA
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION CD-ROM XA
Copyright May 1991
For details of the formats, see Chapter 4, References.
System Configuration and Music Creation
The use of the PlayStation Sound Tool involves the following devices and software:
• Apple Macintosh II/Quadra™ series and Power Macintosh™ series
– PCI slot x 1 or more
– Memory area of 16 M-bytes or more
– Hard disk (10 MB or more space needed)
• Peripheral devices
– Display of 13 or more inches
– D/A converter (such as DAT) with square optical (TOSLINK) input
– Reproduction devices including amplifier, speaker and headphone
• Software
– MacOS 7.5.3 or later
– FreeMIDI System Ver.1.26 or later
In order to use the PlayStation Sound Tool comfortably, it is recommended that the following environment
be set up:
• Apple PowerMacintosh series
– PowerPC 604 / 120 MHz or higher
– PCI slot x 2 or more
– 32 M bytes or more of memory area
– Hard disk (1 GB or more) for saving sound source data
• Peripheral Equipment
– High resolution display of 17 inches or more
1-4 Overview
Sound Artist Tool
Environment for Music Creation
Actual music creation using the PlayStation tool involves the following system in addition to the items given
in the preceding paragraph for the operating environment.
Table 1–3: Equipment Needed for Creation Environment
Function Device
Sampler Records data from DAT, CT Audiomedia III (Digidesign)
and other devices to HD. Pro Tools III (Digidesign)
CD-3000 (AKAI)
Waveform editing Edits stored waveforms. SoundDesigner II (Digidesign)
software Alchemy (Passport Design)
INFINITY (Jupiter)
MIDI keyboard Enters score data from
keyboard.
Sequence software Enters, edits and Performer (Mark of the Unicorn)
reproduces score data. Vision (Opcode System)
MIDI Interface Connects a MIDI device to MIDI Interface (Apple Computer)
the Macintosh serial port. MIDI Translator (Opcode Systems)
MIDI Timepiece (Mark of the Unicorn)
MIDI Manager Patches software and Free MIDI (Mark of the Unicorn)
devices for MIDI. OMS (Opcode System)
Example of Music Creation Environment
Figure 1–1: Example of Music Creation Environment
Macint osh sampler
DTL-H800
DAT
amp
MID I/F, Inst.
Overview 1-5
Sound Artist Tool
Process of Music Creation
The following gives the process of music creation for the PlayStation unit.
On Macintosh
• HD recording and waveform editing
• Waveform data conversion
• Sound source set development and editing
• Sequence development and editing
• Sequence data conversion
Figure 1–2: Macintosh
Macintosh
On PC/AT-compatible machine
• Programming and linking
• Final sequence and SE checking
• Inspection of real time effects
• Data conversion and interleave (MovConv *)
• CD-ROM fixing (CD-ROM generator *)
• Completion
Figure 1–3: PC/AT-compatible machine
IBM PC/AT
compatible
• MovConv (MOVCONV.EXE) is included in the PlayStation Runtime Library (DTL-S2310).
• The CD-ROM Generator is a CD-ROM generation tool (DTL-S2210).
1-6 Overview
Sound Artist Tool
Sound Artist Tool
Chapter 2:
Installation
2-2 Installation
Sound Artist Tool
Installation 2-3
Sound Artist Tool
Setting up DTL-H800
Setting up the PlayStation Sound Board (DTL-H800) requires the following operations:
• PlayStation Sound Board installation
• Connection of the board output to the D/A converter
Installing PlayStation Sound Board
Referring to the Macintosh manual, unplug the power cable and remove the cover of the computer being
used (1). Install DTL-H800 in an empty PCI slot (2) and replace the cover (3).
Figure 2–1: Installing Board
Connecting Board Output and D/A Converter
The rear panel of DTL-H800 is provided with a set of square TOSLINK optical digital output terminals so
attach them to the D/A converter (DAT, etc.) using the square optical cable sold separately.
2-4 Installation
Sound Artist Tool
Installing DTL-S810
The Sound Artist Tool disk for the Macintosh is required in order to perform installation.
1. Start up the Macintosh.
2. Insert the Sound Artist Tool disk into the floppy disk drive.
3. Drag the disk icon to the location where DTL-S810 is to be installed.
Figure 2–2: Installing Software
DTL-S810 has now been installed.
Should the application icon not be displayed correctly after the installation (becoming the default icon),
reconstruct the desktop computer. This can be accomplished by starting up the Macintosh with both
the option key and the command key (the key with the Apple mark) pressed. For details, refer to the
Macintosh user’s guide.
Installation 2-5
Sound Artist Tool
Testing System
Immediately after installing the PlayStation Sound Board (DTL-H800) and the PlayStation Sound Tool (DTLS810), carry out the following tests to check that the system is installed correctly.
Connection Test
Check that the PlayStation Sound Board is installed correctly in the PCI slot and that the square optical
cable is connected correctly.
Reproduction Test
Check the actual sound reproduction using PlayStation Sound Tool sample data.
Should an error be detected during the test, make sure that the system is properly connected and that the
software is installed correctly. Should the cause not be isolated, please contact our business department.
1. Open the “sample” folder in the installed Sound Artist Tool folder.
2. Open the VAB folder, double click the file named “sample.vab,” and start up the Sound Tool
SoundDelicatessen. If the following dialog box is displayed, this indicates that the board is not correctly
installed. Immediately shut down the system and check board setup.
Figure 2–3: Error Message Panel
If double clicking the file does not startup SoundDelicatessen, double click and initiate
SoundDelicatessen in the “Bank Editor” folder in the installed Sound Artist Tool folder. Then, open the
“sample.vab” file within the application.
2-6 Installation
Sound Artist Tool
3. When the SoundDelicatessen is started up, data is automatically transferred to the Sound Board, and
the keyboard window is displayed. It is also possible to select ”Mac -> SPU” from the “SoundBoard”
menu and then manually transfer sound data to the SPU sound source memory.
Figure 2–4: “SoundBoard” Menu
When data transfer is complete, the Keyboard window is displayed.
Figure 2–5: “Keyboard” Window
4. Clicking the displayed Keyboard window with the mouse causes a piano sound to be reproduced.
Should no piano sound be reproduced, check the D/A converter and amplifier connections, and also
the volume.
5. Select “Quit” from the “File” menu to terminate SoundDelicatessen.
Sound Artist Tool
Chapter 3:
Tutorials
3-2 Tutorials
Sound Artist Tool
Tutorials 3-3
Sound Artist Tool
Creating Sound Data for PlayStation Unit
The following are the sound data formats which can be handled by the PlayStation:
Table 3–1: PlayStation Sound Formats
Data format Definition
SEQ PlayStation sound sequence data format
SEP PlayStation sound multi-track sequence data format
VAB PlayStation sound bank data format
VH PlayStation sound bank data format (Attribute part)
VB PlayStation sound bank data format (Waveform part)
DA PlayStation CD-DA format
XA PlayStation CD-ROM XA voice channel format
VAG PlayStation waveform data format
(Intermediate data format)
The PlayStation Sound Tool supports the following applications to create and edit data:
Table 3–2: Applications Supported
Application Definition
SMF2SEQ Sequence data converter
AIFF2VAG Waveform data converter
VAG Player Waveform data player
SoundDelicatessen Sound source bank editor (including the Sound Board driver)
RAW2DA Endian converter for CD-DA data
RAW2XA Data encoder for CD-ROM XA voice channel
The PlayStation programmer tool supports the following two applications for DOS/V to simplify data and
memory management:
Table 3–3: Supported DOS Applications
Application Definition
VABSPLIT.EXE VAB data separation tool
SEQ2SEP.EXE SEP creation tool
Refer to the on-line programmer tools manual for these DOS/V applications.
3-4 Tutorials
Sound Artist Tool
SMF2SEQ - Creating Sequence Data
SMF2SEQ converts a format 1 standard MIDI file (SMF) created by such sequence software (score editing
software) as Performer (Mark of the Unicorn) and Vision (Opcode) into the sequence data format (SEQ file)
for the PlayStation.
Table 3–4: Appropriate Format (SMF)
Appropriate format SMF (Format 1)
Sampling frequency Optional
Appropriate message Note on/off
Program change
Pitch bend
Control change
Resolution in SEQ is optional. But the highest resolution depends on the actual reproduction mode (1/60
sec., 1/120 sec., 1/240 sec., etc.).
Setting up SMF File
Before using SMF2SEQ, save the sequence to be converted by your sequence software in the SMF format
(format 1).
Figure 3–1: SMF Output in Performer
Tutorials 3-5
Sound Artist Tool
SMF2SEQ - Creating Sequence Data
Using SMF2SEQ
1. Double click the SMF2SEQ icon to start up the application.
2. Select “Convert” in the “File” menu, and specify the file to be converted.
Figure 3–2: SMF2SEQ File Menu
3. When prompted to enter the output file name, enter the file name to be assigned after conversion.
Figure 3–3: SMF2SEQ
4. When conversion is complete, the MIDI message summary which was deleted during conversion will
be displayed.
Figure 3–4: SMF2SEQ Deleted Messages
3-6 Tutorials
Sound Artist Tool
5. Select “Quit” from the “File” menu to terminate the application. An SMF file can also be converted by
dragging it to the SMF2SEQ icon. (Two or more SMF files can be selected.)
Also, setting the Automatic Conversion Mode (Auto), Interactive Conversion Mode (Interactive) and
BankChange Forced Deletion Mode (Remove BankChange) is possible using the mode menu.
Figure 3–5: SMF2SEQ Mode Menu
AIFF2VAG - Creating Waveform Data
AIFF2VAG converts an Apple AIFF (Audio Interchange File Format) file created by such existing waveform
editing software as SoundDesigner II™ (Digidesign) and Alchemy™ (Passport Designs) into the waveform
data format VAG file for the PlayStation unit.
For VAG, a multiple of 28 of samples are handled as one block because of hardware characteristics. Thus,
handling a sound source with a loop requires that the loop length be a multiple of 28.
Setting up AIFF File
Before using AIFF2VAG, save the waveform data to be converted by your waveform editing software in the
AIFF format (16 bits, monophonic, non-compressed).
Figure 3–6: AIFF Output in SoundDesignerII
Tutorials 3-7
Sound Artist Tool
Using AIFF2VAG
1. Double click the AIFF2VAG icon to start up the application.
2. The AIFF file to be converted is requested when “Convert” is selected from the “File” menu, so specify
the file at this time.
Figure 3–7: AIFF2VAG File Menu
3. Specify the number of samples to be converted and the loop start point.
Figure 3–8: AIFF2VAG Conversion File
4. When the output file name is requested, enter the file name to be assigned after conversion.
5. Select “Quit” from the “File” menu to terminate the application.
An AIFF file can also be converted by dragging it to the AIFF2VAG icon. (Two or more AIFF files can be
selected.)
Setting of the standard, high band components, low band components and 4bit straight compression
can be carried out by means of the Compression mode menu. When noise components are
conspicuous in normal compression, they can sometimes be made less so when converted in another
mode.
Figure 3–9: AIFF2VAG Compression Mode Menu
Setting of the automatic conversion mode (Auto) or Interactive conversion mode (Interactive) and also
setting of the modes related to sound reproduction after conversion (Silent, Play after converted, Show
panel after conversion) is possible by means of the Conversion mode.
3-8 Tutorials
Sound Artist Tool
Figure 3–10: AIFF2VAG Conversion Mode Menu
It is also possible to reproduce a VAG file which has already been converted by selecting “Select VAG...”
from the file menu. By pressing the mouse button on the AIFF2VAG panel after selecting VAG, sound
production can be repeatedly checked.
VAG Player - Reproduces Waveform Data
VAG Player is a tool for using the PlayStation Sound Board to reproduce a waveform data format VAG file
for the PlayStation unit converted by AIFF2VAG.
This reproduction is based on the AIFF sampling frequency during conversion, and changes the
reproduction pitch.
Using VAG Player
1. Double click the VAG Player icon to start up the application.
2. Select “Open” from the “File” menu, and then select the VAG file to be reproduced.
3. When the file has been selected, VAG data is transferred to the PlayStation Sound Board, which in turn
reproduces sound.
4. When prompted to do so, select the file to be reproduced next. Press “Cancel” to return to activation
state.
5. Select “Quit” from the “File” menu to terminate the application.
A VAG file can also be reproduced by dragging it to the VAG Player icon. (Two or more VAG files can be
selected.)
The file name, file size and sampling frequency of the selected VAG file are displayed. Pressing the “Play”
button reproduces VAG. (If two or more files have been selected, press the “Play” button for each VAG file.)
When reproduction of the VAG file is not required, press “Skip”. When canceling the reproduction of all
VAG files, select “Skip All”.
Figure 3–11: Dialog Box for Dragging and Dropping VAG Player Icon
Tutorials 3-9
Sound Artist Tool
SoundDelicatessen-Implements Sound Source Data
This section describes the structure of VAB data of created by SoundDelicatessen and how to use
SoundDelicatessen, and briefly explains the components of the window.
For the screen configuration and component sections, and for the dialog messages, see chapter 4.
VAB Data Structure
This paragraph first explains the structure of VAB data briefly.
VAB data is composed of tone attributes (including program attributes) comprising two hierarchies, and of
a list of waveforms (VAG list).
Figure 3–12: VAB Structure
Up to 128 program attributes can be cataloged in one unit of VAB. A program corresponds to a sound
source number in MIDI, being equivalent to music instrument levels of “piano”, “guitar”, “drum”, etc.
Program changes (patch changes) in the sequence data cause the current program to be altered.
The tone attributes are program components. A maximum of 16 tone attributes can be cataloged in one
program. Up to 2,048 tone attributes can be cataloged in one VAB.
A VAG list can contain up to 254 VAG files converted by AIFF2VAG. Restrictions of the SPU sound source
memory requires that the total of VAG data be 520,160 bytes or less.
The following gives an example of VAB.
Figure 3–13: Example of VAB
In a program (instrument) level, VAB in the above example is composed of “piano”, “drum”, “guitar” and
“effect sound”.
3-10 Tutorials
Sound Artist Tool
The “drum” comprises four tones of “kick”, “cymbals”, “snare” and “tambourine”. The tones are based on
an independent VAG list.
Preparing Required Data
SoundDelicatessen requires a VAG file created by the above-mentioned AIFF2VAG as waveform data. This
is explained here using “sample.vag” as an example.
Also, the VAB sound source test which uses the second half sequencer, utilizes the “sample.vab”,
“sample.vab.s” and “sample.mid” VAB files included in the sample data.
Startup
Double click on the SoundDelicatessen icon to start up SoundDelicatessen.
If SoundDelicatessen has been started up correctly, the following message is displayed for several
seconds.
Figure 3–14: Message Displayed during SoundDelicatessen Startup
If the PlayStation Sound Board is not correctly installed, the following message is displayed.
Figure 3–15: Error Message Panel during SoundDelicatessen Startup
If the message is displayed, immediately shut down the system and check the system setup in accordance
with Chapter 2, Installation.
When board initialization is complete, the following dialog is displayed and a VAB is requested. When
creating a new file, press the ‘cancel’ button.
Figure 3–16: Dialog Box after Board Initialization
Tutorials 3-11
Sound Artist Tool
Termination
To terminate SoundDelicatessen, select “Quit” from the “File” menu, or enter Command-Q.
Creating a new VAB
1. Double click on the SoundDelicatessen icon to start up the application.
2. Press “Cancel” in the VAB Open dialog and then select “New” from the “File” menu to open a new
VAB.
3. The gray window is displayed.
Figure 3–17: SoundDelicatessen Program List Window
This is the program list window. In the program list window, tone names and volume balance can be
set for panning.
First, enter “drum” in the program name column for program number (Prog#) 0 and, then, press the tab
key. Enter “127” for volume (vol) and press the tab key again. Then, enter “64” for panning. Now, the
program (instrument) can be developed which provides for the highest volume and center panning, and
has a name of the drum.
3-12 Tutorials
Sound Artist Tool
4. Press the tone list display button (“>>”) at the top (Prog#0) of the program list window to display the
cream-colored window.
Figure 3–18: SoundDelicatessen Tone List Window
This is the tone list window. In the tone list window, catalog the actual waveforms constituting tones in
the above program window.
Also, selecting “Show Tones” in the “Windows” menu allows the tone list window to be displayed.
5. With the tone list window left as it is, press the VAG link button (“>>”) on its top (Tone#) to have the
orange window displayed.
Figure 3–19: SoundDelicatessen VAG List Window
Tutorials 3-13
Sound Artist Tool
This is the VAG list window. In the VAG list window, catalog the waveform data VAG file created by
AIFF2VAG.
Also, selecting “Show VAGs” in the “Window” menu allows the VAG list window to be displayed.
6. The next step is to actually catalog the VAG. First, click the “append VAG” button in the window. When
asked which VAG file is to be cataloged, select the “sample.vag” included in the sample data.
Figure 3–20: Cataloging to SoundDelicatessen VAG List
If other VAG types have been created, catalog them.
7. Use the cataloged VAG in the tone list window. Clicking the “Use This” button (“<<”) at the top causes
the tone list window to be displayed and the default tone attribute values to be entered automatically.
Figure 3–21: Setting SoundDelicatessen Tone Attributes
The tone attributes are: tone number (Tone#); VAG link button (VAG); tone name (name); priority (prior);
waveform mode (mode); volume (vol); pan pot (pan); center pitch (center note); fine center pitch (center
fine); effective interval (note limit min/max); vertical pitch bend (pit. bend minus/plus); ADSR settings
(settings); and VAG reference number (VAG#).
The above tone attributes are arranged from the left in that order.
For the tone attributes, see chapter 4.
3-14 Tutorials
Sound Artist Tool
8. Now, a simple sound source has been implemented. Following is a test of the actual sound
reproduction.
First, select “Mac -> SPU” from the SoundBoard menu, and transfer the waveform data to the SPU
sound source memory. The violet keyboard window then appears.
Figure 3–22: Keyboard Window
This keyboard allows a check of sound production by clicking with the mouse.
Clicking and dragging keys on the keyboard enable reproduction at various intervals.
Pressing the mouse button causes a “note on” message to be sent to the Sound Board and releasing
the button causes a “note off” message to be sent to the Sound Board. Clicking the button with the
shift key pressed causes the “note off” message to be ignored. When continuing loop sound
reproduction, click the keyboard with the shift key pressed.
9. Finally, save the created sound source data VAB and terminate SoundDelicatessen.
Saving VAB data requires the selection of “Save ...” or “Save As ...” from the “File” menu. When saving
for the first time or if “Save As ...” has been selected, enter the name of the file to be saved when
requested. Because data is handled by a PC, it is recommended that the file name be “????????.vab”
(eight half-size alphabetic characters plus .vab).
To terminate SoundDelicatessen, select “Quit” from the “File” menu.
Editing VAB
1. Double click the created VAB file and start up SoundDelicatessen. This causes the VAB file to be
opened automatically after the startup and the data to be downloaded to the Sound Board.
With SoundDelicatessen started up and the file opened, press the “Save” button to save the edited
VAB data, the “Don’t Save” button when saving is not needed, and the “Cancel” button to continue
editing, in response to the save prompt.
Figure 3–23: Dialog Box for Saving SoundDelicatessen File
2. The VAB file is opened, with the program list window displayed.
3. Press the tone list display button (“>>”) for program number zero to display the tone list for program
number zero.
4. Select “Mac -> SPU” in the “SoundBoard” menu to transfer sound data to the SPU sound source
memory.
5. Click on the displayed keyboard window to make sure that sound is produced. Then, click the tone list
again for display nearest you.
Tutorials 3-15
Sound Artist Tool
6. Change the “Pan” item from 64 (center) to 0 (left) or 127 (right). Click the keyboard to make sure that
the reproduced sound is accompanied by pan pot effects.
7. Change the “note limit/max” item from 127 to 60. Then, drag the keys from the furthest left position to
the furthest right position. By setting the note limit at 60, check to make sure that sound is produced
only for intervals lower than 60.
8. Press the “ADSR ...” button to display the ADSR setting screen.
Figure 3–24: ADSR Setting Window
On the ADSR setting screen, the following can be carried out. 1) Set ADSR. 2) Set the waveform
reproduction mode. 3) Test the pitch bend.
a. For ADSR, the change rate or level can be set for any of the following items. The change rate can
be set to provide for exponential or linear changes (only in AR, SR and RR). Further, for SR, the
mode of increase or decrease can also be set.
AR (Attack rate): Change rate after key-on until the highest volume
DR (Decay rate): Change rate from the highest volume to the threshold level
SL (Sustain level): Continued sound level
SR (Sustain rate): Change rate after the threshold level has been reached
RR (Release rate): Change rate of attenuation after key-off
b. In the waveform reproduction mode, the following items can be set.
Vibrate, Portamento
depth: Sets the amplitude of vibration in the range from 0 to 127 in units of 1/4 of half tone.
time: Sets the time of one period of vibration in the range from 0 to 254 in units of ticks (1/60 seconds).
reverb: Specifies the use of reverb effects during tone reproduction.
3-16 Tutorials
Sound Artist Tool
Using MIDI to Check VAB
SoundDelicatessen supports the FreeMIDI System. SoundDelicatessen allows VAB to be checked by the
MIDI sequence software (Performer and Vision) on Macintosh and from the keyboard.
1. Double click and open VAB file “sample.vab” included in sample data.
With VAB opened by SoundDelicatessen, the dialog box pops up to inquire whether to save and close
the file. (See the Figure below.) Click the “Save” button to save the file, the “Don’t Save” button to open
the VAB file without saving, and the “Cancel” button to stop opening the VAB file and continue to edit
currently opened VAB.
Figure 3–25: Dialog Box for Saving SoundDelicatessen File
2. Select “Mac -> SPU” in the SoundBoard menu to transfer VAB to the SPU sound source memory.
3. Next, start up the sequence software to open the “sample.mid” SMF file included in the sample data.
4. Confirm the FreeMIDI System settings in the FreeMIDI Setup application.
In the above example, FreeMIDI is installed.
Tutorials 3-17
Sound Artist Tool
5. Use the sequence software to set the output device to “SONY PSX-1~16”, reproduce the recentlyopened SMF data, and make sure that sound is output from the SoundBoard via DAT, etc.
Figure 3–26: DEVICE Setting Example in Performer 5.02
If the MIDI message is sent correctly from the sequence software to the SoundDelicatessen, a red dot
flashes above the keyboard in the keyboard window and the indicator to the right of the keyboard expands
and contracts.
If no sound is reproduced and no changes are observed in the keyboard window, it is possible that MIDI
may was not set up properly so check the FreeMIDI System connection and devices.
Checking Reverb
The PlayStation unit can access nine kinds of reverb effects. This section explains how to set the reverb.
1. Double click and open VAB file “sample.vab” included in sample data.
2. Select “Mac -> SPU” from the SoundBoard menu to transfer VAB to the SPU sound source memory.
3. Click the tone list display button (“>>”) to the left of “piano” in the top line of the program list to display
the tone list for program number zero.
4. Next, click the “piano2” ADSR setting button (“ADSR ...”) in the top line of the tone list to display the
ADSR setting window.
3-18 Tutorials
Sound Artist Tool
5. Click the “reverb” checkbox and declare the use of reverb in this tone. Then press the “Apply” button
to fix settings.
Figure 3–27: Setting SoundDelicatessen Reverb
In the tone list, the “piano2” “mode” item becomes “4”. This tone is thereby set to use reverb. Also, the
reverb can be set by entering a number “4” for this item. For “piano3”, “piano4” and “piano5” a number
of 4 is entered in order that the reverb can take effect.
Now, the reverb for VAB data can be applied.
6. Next, in the “DSP” menu, select the “5: Hall” type.
Thus, SPU starts to operate the reverb.
7. With the keyboard window displayed, click the keyboard to check effects of reverb sound.
The depth (reverb sound volume) can be set in the reverb settings. Also, in the “7:Echo” type, delay and
feedback can be set and in the “8:Delay” type, the delay can be set.
The use of the reverb requires a reverb operation work area of several k-bytes to several tens of k-bytes.
The following table indicates the required sizes. The size of each type is also covered in the DSP menu.
Table 3–5: SoundDelicatessen Reverb Type
Type Work size (bytes) Effect
Room 9,920 Small room
Studio A 9,000 Studio (Small)
Studio B 18,496 Studio (Medium)
Studio C 28,640 Studio (Large)
Hall 44,512 Hall
Space 63,168 Universal space
Echo 98,368 Echo
Delay 98,368 Delay
Pipe 7,072 In a metal pipe
Tutorials 3-19
Sound Artist Tool
Printing VAB Attribute Table
SoundDelicatessen can print the set program, tone and VAG lists. A printed sheet providing effect tone
sound layout in a program allows the efficient utilization of the effect sound. The program can use the
output sheet along with data for smoother data exchange.
1. With the VAB file opened, select “Preferences ...” in the “File” menu to display the print setting dialog
box. Specify the printer font to be used for output, the number of printing lines per page, program,
tones, and whether or not the VAG list is to be printed.
Figure 3–28: Printing Option Dialog Box
2. Next, select “Page Setup ...” in the “File” menu to have the printing setting dialog box displayed. Check
the form size and the printing direction, and press the “OK”button.
Figure 3–29: Printing Setting Dialog Box
3-20 Tutorials
Sound Artist Tool
3. Select “Print ...” in the “File” menu to have the printing dialog box displayed. Check the number of
prints and press the “Print” button.
Figure 3–30: Printing Dialog Box
Note: In the above example, printer driver LaserWrite 8 is used to display the dialog box for output to Apple Note:
LaserWriter II NTX. For other printers, the displayed screen may be different.
RAW2DA - Creates CD-DA Data
RAW2DA converts the SoundDesigner II format (a sampling rate of 44.1 kHz, 16-bit straight PCM
stereophonic (L→R→L→R) data, big Endian) created by such existing waveform editing software as
SoundDesigner II (Digidesign) and Alchemy (Passport Designs) into the CD-DA file (little Endian) for the
PlayStation.
The CD-ROM Generator software which masters disks for the PlayStation supports Windows .WAV
waveform format data. When the waveform editing software being used can directly output the .WAV data,
there is no need to use RAW2DA. At that time, confirm that it is 44.1 kHz stereo 16 bit.
Preparing DA Data
Before using RAW2DA, save the sound data to be converted by your waveform editing (HD recording)
software in the SoundDesigner II format (16 bits, stereophonic, 44.1 kHz). Make sure that the sampling rate
is 44.1 kHz for stereophonic sound (two channels).
Note: The converter does not convert the sampling rate nor make monophonic sound stereophonic. Be Note:
sure to use stereophonic data of 16 bits.
Using RAW2DA
1. Double click the RAW2DA icon to start up the application.
2. Specify a file in response to the request for a SoundDesigner II file to be converted after selecting
“Convert ...” in the “File” menu.
3. In response to the prompt message for an output file name, enter the file name to be assigned after the
conversion.
4. Select “Quit” from the “File” menu to terminate the application.
Tutorials 3-21
Sound Artist Tool
A SoundDesigner II format file can also be converted by dragging its icon to the RAW2DA icon. (Two or
more icons can be selected at a time.) With “Auto” selected in the “OutputMode” menu after having started
up the application, the selected files from the second onward are converted consecutively into the
corresponding DA data. (An extension of “.da” is appended automatically.)
RAW2XA - Creates CD-ROM XA Voice Data
RAW2XA converts the SoundDesigner II format (a sampling rate of 18.9 or 37.8 kHz, 16-bit straight PCM
monophonic or stereophonic data, big Endian) created by such existing waveform editing software (HD
recording software) as SoundDesigner II (Digidesign) and Alchemy (Passport Designs) into the CD-ROM XA
voice data file for PlayStation.
Unlike such typical straight PCM (not compressed) data, XA voice data is compressed by ADPCM and,
thus, its data amount can be regulated. Depending on the mode, 4 to 16 channels of voice data can be
interleaved during ordinary speed CD reproduction, and 8 to 32 channels of voice data can be interleaved
during double speed reproduction. Interleaved desired XA multi-channel voice data on the CD can be
selected and reproduced by specifying the channel.
Preparing XA Data
Before using RAW2XA, save the sound data to be converted by your waveform editing (HD recording)
software in the SoundDesigner II format (16 bits, monophonic or stereophonic, 18.9 or 37.8 kHz).
The PlayStation unit supports the XA voice data formats for the following four modes:
• 37.8 kHz: Stereophonic 8 channels. Interleave supported.
• 37.8 kHz: Monophonic 16 channels. Interleave supported.
• 18.9 kHz: Stereophonic 16 channels. Interleave supported.
• 18.9 kHz: Monophonic 32 channels. Interleave supported.
Note: The converter does not convert sampling rates, or the monophonic mode into the stereophonic Note:
mode and vice versa. Be sure be develop data for the mode during reproduction.
Using RAW2XA
1. Double click the RAW2XA icon to start up the application.
2. Select “Convert ...” from the “File” menu, and specify the file in the SoundDesigner II format to be
converted.
3. In response to the prompt message for an output file name, enter the file name to be assigned after
conversion.
4. Select “Quit” from the “File” menu to terminate the application.
A SoundDesigner II format file can also be converted by dragging its icon to the RAW2DA icon. (Two or
more icons can be selected at a time.) With “Auto” selected in the “OutputMode” menu after having started
up the application, the selected files from the second onward are converted consecutively into the
corresponding DA data. (A “.da” extension is automatically appended.)
If the data to be converted is not stereophonic at a frequency of 37.8 kHz, select the appropriate data
format in the “Format” menu before conversion.
3-22 Tutorials
Sound Artist Tool
Figure 3–31: “Format” Menu
Interleaving the converted XA file with other data involves programmer movie tool MovPack
(MOVPACK.EXE). For details, refer to the programmer tool manual.
Reproduction by DTL-H2000
This section briefly explains the procedure for using sound data (SEQ and VAB) created by the PlayStation
Sound Tool for reproduction by the programmer tool (DTL-H2000).
For details of the program and compiler, refer to the programmer tool manual.
Developing Sound Data and Program
This paragraph describes sound reproduction using sequence data (SEQ) and sound source data (VAB).
The needed sample program is stored in the following directory for the programmer tool.
\psx\sample\sound\simple
The following are the files to be used:
Sample program description file \psx\sample\sound\simple\readme_e.txt
Make file \psx\sample\sound\simple\makefile.mak
Main program \psx\sample\sound\simple\main.c
VH (VAB attribute) \psx\sample\sound\simple\sample.vh
VB (VAB waveform) \psx\sample\sound\simple\sample.vb
SEQ \psx\sample\sound\basic\fuga.seq
Using DTL-H2000 to Reproduce Sound Data
1. Compile the program.
Compiling the program involves movement to the \psx\sample\sound\simple and the entry of “make
all”. The following are the contents of makefile.mak:
makefile.mak
all:
ccpsx -g -Xo$80100000 -Xm main.c -omain.cpe.main.sym.main.map
load:
pqbload sample.vh 80015000
pqbload sample.vb 80020000
pqbload ..\basic\fuga.seq 80010000
clean:
del *.?~
del *.??~
del *.cpe
del *.sym
del *.map
Entering “make all” causes the following command to be issued in accordance with the description of
makefile.mak.
ccpsx -g -Xo$80100000 -Xm main.c -omain.cpe.main.sym.main.map
Program compilation is now complete.
Tutorials 3-23
Sound Artist Tool
2. Load data.
To load data, enter “make load”. The following three commands are executed in accordance with the
makefile.mak description:
pqbload sample.vh 80015000
pqbload sample.vb 80020000
pqbload ..\basic\fuga.seq 80010000
Each of the commands transfers sample.vh, sample.vb and fuga.seq sound data to the specified
addresses.
3. Use the debugger to execute the program.
Executing the program requires that “dbugpax main/r50 /2” be entered. The debugger is started up,
with the main program loaded to the debugger. Pressing “F-9” causes the program to be started up.
Operate the control pad to reproduce sound.
The current tempo, volume and status are displayed.
Figure 3–32: Monitor Output of Sample Program
The following are the keys on the control pad:
Table 3–6: Control Pad Keys
Key Description
START Play (Starts playing.)
SELECT Stop (Stops playing.)
X Replay
• Pause
R1 Gradually increases the tempo.
L1 Gradually decreases the tempo.
↑ Increases the volume.
↓ Decreases the volume.
← Gradually decreases the volume to zero.
→ Gradually increases the volume to 127.
SELECT + START Close (Terminates playing)
3-24 Tutorials
Sound Artist Tool
Program Flow
This paragraph briefly explains the program flow used for the sample. The items not related to sound are
omitted.
main.c
/*
 * sample..simple
 */
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <libgte.h>
#include <libgpu.h> /* Declares the header file of the
library to be used.*/
#include <libetc.h>
#include <libsnd.h>
short vab; /* Declares the variable where the VAB
ID is to be stored.*/
short seq; /* Declares the variable where the SEQ
ID is to be stored.*/
char seq_table[SS_SEQ_TABSIZ * 1 * 1];
/* Acquires the attribute table for SEQ
to be used.*/
main()
{
SsInit(); /* Initializes the sound library.*/
SsSetTableSize (seq_table, 1, 1); /* Passes the SEQ attribute table to the
library.*/
SsSetTickMode(SS_NOTICK); /* Declares the sound interrupt mode.*/
vab = SsVabOpenHead ((u_char *)VAB_HADDR, -1);
/* Passes the VAB attribute section to
the library.*/
if (vab == -1) {
printf ("SsVabOpenHead : failed !!!\n");
return;
}
if (SsVabTransBody ((unsigned char *)VAB_BADDR, vab) != vab) {
/* Starts transferring the VAB waveform
section to the sound buffer.*/
printf ("SsVabTransBody : failed !!!\n");
return;
}
SsVabTransCompleted (SS_WAIT_COMPLETED);
/* Waits for the completion of the
transfer.*/
seq = SsSeqOpen((u_long *)SEQ_ADDR, vab);
/* Passes SEQ to the library.*/
SsSetMVol(MVOL, MVOL); /* Sets the main volume.*/
SsSeqSetVol(seq, SVOL, SVOL); /* Sets the SEQ volume.*/
SsStart(); /* Starts sound interrupt (play).*/
while (1) { /* Main loop*/
/* Main processing*/
VSync(0); /* Waits for the V blank.*/
SsSeqCalledTbyT(); /* Sound processing function */
}
SsSeqClose(seq); /* Closes SEQ.*/
SsVabClose(vab); /* Closes VAB.*/
SsEnd(); /* Stops sound library utilization.*/
SsQuit(); /* Terminates sound library
utilization.*/
return;
}
Sound Artist Tool
Chapter 4:
References
4-2 References
Sound Artist Tool
References 4-3
Sound Artist Tool
Sound File Formats
This section explains the following file formats.
• SEQ
• SEP
• VAG
• VAB
• VH
• VB
• DA
• XA
SEQ
SEQ is the PlayStation sequence data format. The typical extension in DOS is “.SEQ”.
Figure 4–1: SEQ Format
4-4 References
Sound Artist Tool
SEP
SEP is the PlayStation multi-track sequence data format. The typical extension in DOS is “.SEP”.
Figure 4–2: SEP Format
References 4-5
Sound Artist Tool
VAG
VAG is the PlayStation single waveform data format. The typical extension in DOS is “.VAG”.
Figure 4–3: VAG Format
4-6 References
Sound Artist Tool
VAB
VAB is the PlayStation sound source data format. The typical extension in DOS is “.VAB”.
Figure 4–4: VAB Format
The program attribute table has the following structure.
Figure 4–5: VAB Program Attribute Table
The tone attribute table has the following structure.
References 4-7
Sound Artist Tool
Figure 4–6: VAB Tone Attribute Table
VH
VH is the VAB attribute table section. The typical extension in DOS is “.VH”.
Figure 4–7: VH Format
4-8 References
Sound Artist Tool
VB
VB is the VAB waveform data section. The typical extension in DOS is “.VB”.
Figure 4–8: VB Format
DA
DA is the PlayStation CD-DA data format. The typical extension in DOS is “.DA”.
Figure 4–9: DA Format
XA
XA is the PlayStation CD-ROM XA voice data format. The typical extension in DOS is “.XA”.
The XA format is based on the following specifications. The XA file output by RAW2XA has a sub-header.
CD-ROM XA
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION CD-ROM XA
Copyright May 1991
References 4-9
Sound Artist Tool
Commands and Names of Window Components
SMF2SEQ
Upon the startup of SMF2SEQ, the following dialog box is displayed.
Figure 4–10: SMF2SEQ Panel
[File] menu
Figure 4–11: SMF2SEQ: “File” Menu
[File] - [Convert ...]
Starts conversion from SMF into SEQ.
Upon the selection of the [Convert ...] command, the SMF file selection dialog box is displayed. Specify an
SMF file to be converted.
Figure 4–12: SMF2SEF File Selection Dialog Box
When the [Open] button is pressed, the SEQ file name specification dialog box is displayed.
Figure 4–13: SMF2SEQ: SEQ File Specification Dialog Box
Pressing the [Save] button starts conversion.
4-10 References
Sound Artist Tool
[File] - [Quit]
Terminates the SMF2SEQ application.
[OutputMode] Menu
Figure 4–14: SMF2SEQ "Output Mode" Menu
[OutputMode] - [Auto]
Sets mode to continuous automatic conversion mode. When specifying multiple SMF files through drag
and drop, the ‘save to.......’ directory specification panel is displayed only for the first file, all subsequent
files are output to the same folder.
[OutputMode] - [Interactive]
Sets mode to interactive mode. The ‘save to.......’ file specification panel is displayed at conversion.
[OutputMode] - {Remove BankChange (#0) ]
The BankChange message during conversion is forcibly deleted.
AIFF2VAG
Upon the startup of AIFF2VAG, the following dialog box is displayed.
Figure 4–15: AIFF2VAG Panel
[File] menu
Figure 4–16: AIFF2VAG: “File” Menu
[File] - [Convert ...]
Starts conversion from AIFF into VAG.
Upon the selection of the [Convert ...] command, the AIFF file selection dialog box is displayed. Specify an
AIFF file to be converted.
References 4-11
Sound Artist Tool
Figure 4–17: AIFF2VAG: AIFF File Selection Dialog Box
When the [Open] button is pressed, the loop point specification dialog box is displayed.
Figure 4–18: AIFF2VAG: Conversion Panel
Number of
conversion
source
samples
Number of
samples to be
converted
Loop end
movement
button Loop Start
Is looping
present?
When the [Convert] button is pressed, the VAG file name specification dialog box is displayed.
Figure 4–19: AIFF2VAG: VAG File Specification Dialog Box
Pressing the [Save] button starts conversion. When conversion is complete the VAG data is downloaded to
the DTL-H800 and reproduced. (The “Mode” can be set so that it does not automatically reproduce).
[File] - [Select VAG...]
Specify the VAG file, download it to the DTL-H800 and reproduce it.
[File] - [Play]
Either the VAG data which was just converted or the VAG data which was downloaded is reproduced for a
second time. Clicking the mouse on the AIFF2VAG panel has the same effect.
4-12 References
Sound Artist Tool
[File] - [Stop]
Stops repoduction of VAG data (including looped infinite waveforms). Clicking the mouse on the AIFF2VAG
panel has the same effect (during downloading, release the button).
[File] - [Quit]
Terminates the AIFF2VAG application.
[Compression] menu
Figure 4–20: AIFF2VAG: “Compression” Menu
Specifies the type of compression.
[Compress] - [Standard]
Selects a typical compression type.
[Compress] - [High Band]
Selects the compression type adapted to the waveform comprising more high-frequency components.
[Compress] - [Low Band]
Selects the compression type adapted to the waveform comprising more low-frequency components.
[Compress] - [4-bit Straight]
Selects the type for compressing 16-bit data simply to 4-bit data.
[Mode] Menu
Specifies the conversion mode and play mode.
Figure 4–21: AIFF2VAG "Mode" Menu
[Mode] - [Continuous]
Sets mode to continuous conversion mode. When specifying multiple AIFF files in drag and drop, the ‘save
in.......directory’ specification panel is displayed only for the first file, all files after that are output to the same
folder.
[Mode] - [Interactive]
Sets mode to interactive mode. The ‘save in.......directory’ setting panel is displayed at conversion.
[Mode] - [Silent]
No playing is carried out after conversion.
[Mode] - [Play after converted]
Automatically plays after conversion.
References 4-13
Sound Artist Tool
[Mode] - [Show panel after converted]
The following panel is displayed after conversion.
Figure 4–22: AIFF2VAG Playback Confirmation Panel
VAG Player
Starting up VAG Player causes the following dialog box to pop up.
Figure 4–23: VAG Player Panel
[File] menu
Figure 4–24: VAG Player: “File” Menu
[File] - [Select VAG ...]
Select VAG to be reproduced.
After selecting the [Select VAG ...] command, the VAG file selection dialog box is displayed. Select the VAG
to be reproduced.
Figure 4–25: VAG Player: VAG File Selection Dialog Box
4-14 References
Sound Artist Tool
[File] - [Quit]
Terminates the VAG Player application.
Dragging the VAG file to the VAG Player application icon causes the following dialog box to be displayed.
Two or more VAG units can be dropped.
Figure 4–26: VAG Player: Dialog box for dragging and dropping
The VAG file reproduction function is also included in AIFF2VAG.
SoundDelicatessen
When SoundDelicatessen is started up, the following dialog box is displayed until set up is complete.
Figure 4–27: SoundDelicatessen Panel
[File] menu
Figure 4–28: SoundDelicatessen: “File” menu
References 4-15
Sound Artist Tool
[File] - [NEW]
Opens new VAB.
Upon the selection of the [NEW] command, the following program list window is displayed.
Figure 4–29: SoundDelicatessen: Program list window
Total VAG count
Upward movement by item
Upward movement by line
Number of tones included in program
Program attributes (0-255)
Program pan pot (0-127)
Downward movement by line
Downward movement by item
Main volume
(0-127)
Tone Display
button
 Program number
Volume (0-127)
Program name
Total capacity
waveform (VB) Empty buffer capacity
[File] - [Open ...]
Opens an existing VAB file.
[File] - [Close]
Closes the VAB file currently edited.
[File] - [Save ...]
Saves the VAB file currently edited.
[File] - [Save As ...]
Saves the VAB file currently edited under an alias.
[File] - [Import program ...]
Loads a program unit.
Select the [Import program...] command and then the program file to be loaded. When the file has been
selected, register the program order by entering a number from 0 to 127 when requested, and clicking the
[Import] button.
Figure 4–30: SoundDelicatessen: Program Import
4-16 References
Sound Artist Tool
[File] - [Export program...]
Writes a program unit.
When using the [Export program...] command to output a program, click the tone display button for the
program to be output, and select the [Export program...] command with the tone list window displayed.
When requested to confirm the number of the program to be output, click the [Export] button if the
program is correct.
Figure 4–31: SoundDelicatessen: Program Export
[File] - [Page Setup...]
Sets up the printer.
Set the paper size. The paper setting dialog box displayed may vary with the printer used.
Figure 4–32: SoundDelicatessen: Print setting dialog box
References 4-17
Sound Artist Tool
[File] - [Print]
Prints the attribute table (VH section).
Clicking the [print] button with the print count set starts printing. The printer dialog box displayed may vary
with the printer used.
Figure 4–33: SoundDelicatessen Printer Dialog Box
[File] - [Preferences...]
Sets the printing option.
Specify the printer font to be used.
Figure 4–34: SoundDelicatessen: Print option dialog box
[File] - [Quit]
Terminates the SoundDelicatessen application.
4-18 References
Sound Artist Tool
[Edit] menu
Figure 4–35: SoundDelicatessen: “Edit” menu
[Edit] - [Cut]
Cuts the character pointed to by the inverted cursor.
[Edit] - [Copy]
Copies the character pointed to be the inverted cursor.
[Edit] - [Paste]
Pastes the previously cut or copied character to the current cursor position.
[Edit] - [Insert new line]
Inserts a new program, tone or VAG into the line pointed to by the inverted cursor.
[Edit] - [Copy this line]
Copies the program or tone pointed to by the inverted cursor. When copying a program, all the tones
contained within it are also copied.
[Edit] - [Paste this line]
Copies the previously copied program or tone to the line pointed to by the cursor. When copying a
program, all the tones contained within it are also pasted.
[Edit] - [Delete this line]
Deletes the program or tone pointed to by the inverted cursor. When copying a program, all the tones
contained within it are also deleted.
[Edit] - [Top]
Movement to the start program, tone or VAG
[Edit] - [Buttom]
Movement to the end program, tone or VAG
References 4-19
Sound Artist Tool
[Windows] menu
Figure 4–36: SoundDelicatessen: “Windows” menu
[Windows] - [Show Programs]
Displays the program list window.
[Windows] - [Show Tones]
Displays the tone list window.
Figure 4–37: SoundDelicatessen: Tone list window
Priority Mode
Mode
Volume
Pan pot (0:Left,64: Center, 127:Right)
Center note (by half tones)
Fine tune (by 100/127 cents Mute button
VAG number
ADSR setting
button
Pitch bend
(by half tones)
Note Limit
(by half tones)
Sound
production
button
Program
Tone
number
VAG list
display
button
Tone name
(up to 16
characters)
Clicking the “ADSR...” button in the tone list allows the tone ADSR, etc. to be set.
4-20 References
Sound Artist Tool
Figure 4–38: SoundDelicatessen: ADSR setting window
[Windows] - [Show VAGs]
Displays the VAG list window.
Figure 4–39: SoundDelicatessen: VAG list window
Clicking the [<<(UseThis)] button allows the VAG file to be used in the tone list (a link is applied.)
Clicking the [append VAG] button allows a new VAG to be cataloged to the end of the VAG list.
References 4-21
Sound Artist Tool
[Windows] - [Show Keyboard]
Displays the keyboard window.
Figure 4–40: SoundDelicatessen: Keyboard window
[Windows] - [Regist new VAG...]
Catalogs new VAG in the VAG list window.
This command is equivalent to [append VAG] on the VAG list window.
[SoundBoard] menu
Figure 4–41: SoundDelicatessen: “SoundBoard” menu
[SoundBoard] - [MAC -> SPU]
Transfers the VB (waveform data) section of the cataloged VAG to the Sound Board.
[SoundBoard] - [MIDI]
Sets MIDI.
With Apple MIDI Manager and MIDI Driver installed correctly, MIDI is connected automatically and this item
is checked. Use this function to temporarily disconnect MIDI.
[SoundBoard] - [All Note Off]
Forcibly stops sound production from the Sound Board.
When the sequence is suspended or if a low release rate (ADSR RR) for the loop sound source has been
set, some sound may remain. Use this function for muting.
4-22 References
Sound Artist Tool
[DSP] menu
Figure 4–42: SoundDelicatessen: “DSP” menu
[DSP] - [Depth]
This is a sub-menu for setting reverb depth (reverb volume).
[DSP] - [Feed Back]
This is a sub-menu for setting the reverb feedback amount.*
*The [Feed Back] command can only be set when using “Echo” type reverb.
[DSP] - [Delay Time]
This is a sub-menu for setting the reverb delay.*
* The [Feed Back] command can only be set when using “Echo” or “Delay” type reverbs.
The following are specifications of each reverb type:
Table 4–1: Reverb Types
Type Work size (bytes) Effect
Room 9,920 Small room
Studio A 9,000 Studio (Small)
Studio B 18,496 Studio (Medium)
Studio C 28,640 Studio (Large)
Hall 44,512 Hall
Space 63,168 Universal space
Echo 98,368 Echo
Delay 98,368 Delay
Pipe 7,072 In a metal pipe
References 4-23
Sound Artist Tool
RAW2DA
When starting up RAW2DA, the following dialog box is displayed.
Figure 4–43: RAW2A Panel
[File] menu
Figure 4–44: RAW2DA: “File” menu
[File] - [Convert...]
Selects a RAW file to be selected and starts conversion.
Like the SoundDesigner II format (44.1 kHz, stereophonic), the RAW file contains 16-bit straight PCM data
in L→R→L→R order.
[File] - [Quit]
Terminates the RAW2DA application.
[OutputMode] menu
Figure 4–45: RAW2DA: “OutputMode” menu
[OutputMode] - [Auto]
Sets mode to continuous automatic conversion mode. When specifying multiple SDII data through drag
and drop, the ‘save to.......’ directory specification panel is displayed for the first file only and all subsequent
files are output to the same folder.
[OutputMode] - [Interactive]
Sets mode to interactive mode. The ‘save to......’ file specification panel is displayed at conversion.
4-24 References
Sound Artist Tool
RAW2XA
When RAW2XA is started up, the following dialog box is displayed.
Figure 4–46: RAW2XA Panel
[File] menu
Figure 4–47: RAW2XA: “File” menu
[File] - [Convert...]
Selects the RAW file or AIFF file to be converted and starts conversion.
Like the SoundDesigner II format (44.1 kHz, stereophonic), the RAW file contains 16-bit straight PCM data
in L→R→L→R order.
[File] - [Quit]
Terminates the RAW2XA application.
[Format] menu
Figure 4–48: RAW2XA: “Format” menu
[Format] - [37.8 kHz - stereo]
[Format] - [37.8 kHz - mono]
[Format] - [18.9 kHz - stereo]
[Format] - [18.9 kHz - mono]
Specify the mode for the file to be converted.
RAW2XA does not convert the sampling frequency or stereophonic sound to monophonic sound and vice
versa. Thus, prepare RAW data or AIFF data adapted to the format in advance.
References 4-25
Sound Artist Tool
[OutputMode] menu
Figure 4–49: RAW2XA: “OutputMode” menu
[OutputMode] - [Auto]
Sets mode to continuous automatic conversion mode. When specifying multiple SDII data or AIFF data
through drag and drop, the ‘save to.......’ directory specification panel is displayed for the first file only and
all subsequent files are output to the same folder.
[OutputMode] - [Interactive]
Sets mode to interactive mode. The ‘save to......’ file specification panel is displayed at conversion.
Supporting MIDI in Sound Library
Setting VAB Attribute Data using Control Change
NRPN data is so defined that NRPN for MIDI standard Control Change can be used to set the VAB
attribute data.
Operation
Sequentially sending
bnH 99 data1 (NRPN MSB)
bnH 98 data2 (NRPN LSB)
bnH 06 data3 (Data Entry)
when using the sequence to create an SMF file enables VAB attribute data to be set.
Given below is a description of data1, data2 and data3.
The tone number ranges from 0 to 15. When changing attributes for all tones, set a number of 16.
Because of hardware specifications, however, only one set of such factors as reverb depth can be set by
SPU. The reverb type, depth and the feedback amount cannot be set for each channel for tones and MIDI.
The reverb can be turned on and off only for each voice.
This setting requires that the reverb switch on the ADSR setting screen for SoundDelicatessen be checked.
‘Mode’ for NRPN can be used to change setting in real time from the MIDI sequence.
4-26 References
Sound Artist Tool
Table 4–2: Data Descriptions
Attribute Data1 (CC99) Data2 (CC98) Data3 (CC06)
Priority Tone Number 0 0-15
Mode “ 1 0-4 (*)
Limit low “ 2 0-127
Limit high “ 3 “
ADSR (AR-L) “ 4 “
ADSR (AR-E) “ 5 “
ADSR (DR) “ 6 “
ADSR (SL) “ 7 “
ADSR (SR-L) “ 8 “
ADSR (SR-E) “ 9 “
ADSR (RR-L) “ 10 “
ADSR (RR-E) “ 11 “
ADSR (SR-±) “ 12 0-64:+ , 65-127:-
Vibrate time “ 13 0-255
Portamento depth “ 14 0-127
Reverb type 16 15 0-9 (**)
Reverb depth 16 16 0-127
Echo feed back 16 17 “
Echo delay time 16 18 “
Delay delay time 16 19 “
Vibrate depth Tone Number 21 0-127
Portamento time “ 22 0-255
(*) Mode Type
(**) Reverb Type
Table 4–3: Vibration Types
Number Mode
0 Off
1 Vibrato
2 Portamento
3 1 & 2 (Vibrato & Portamento on)
4 Reverb
Table 4–4: Reverb Type
Number Mode
0 Off
1 Room
2 Studio A
3 Studio B
4 Studio C
5 Hall
6 Space
7 Echo
8 Delay
9 Pipe
References 4-27
Sound Artist Tool
Repeated Setting in Music using Control Change
A music part repetition function has been implemented by NRPN data. Repetition symbol “||:” serves for
Loop1, while “:||” serves for Loop2. The function can be used in a music piece as many times as you
desire. A nest of (Loop1...(Loop1’...Loop2’) ...Loop2) for repetition cannot be used.
Table 4–5: Repetition Functions
Attribute Data1 (CC99) Data3 (CC06)
Loop1 (start) 20 0-127 (***)Developer
Reference
Series
Sprite Editor 1.7
September 1995
Copyright and trademarks
The software and manual are distributed to the licensee of Sony Computer Entertainment
Inc. The software and manual are prohibited from being duplicated or distributed without
prior consent, or from being disclosed nor leaked to any third party.
Our firm is not liable for damage of the customer resulting form the use of the software,
and for any claim from a third party.
The software is subject to change without prior notice because of improvement.
• PlayStation is a registered trademark of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc.
• MS-DOS and Windows are trademarks of U.S. Microsoft Inc.
• IBM and PC/AT are registered trademarks of U.S. International Business Machines
Corporation.
• i486 and DX2 are trademarks of U.S. Intel Inc.
i
Sprite Editor User’s Manual
ii
For using this manual
This manual dwells on using DTL-201A sprite editor version 1.7.
Composition
Part 1 Tutorial
Expounds how to actually operate the sprite editor.
Part 2 References
Sets out each of the functions supported by the sprite editor.
Appendix A Installation
Deals with a method for installing the sprite editor.
Appendix B File formats
Elucidates the file formats supported by the sprite editor.
iii
Contents
Sprite editor user’s manual
Copyright and trademarks............................................................................................i
For using this manual .................................................................................................ii
Contents.....................................................................................................................iii
Overview
1 Major features..........................................................................................2
2 Operating environment............................................................................3
3 File formats..............................................................................................4
Part 1 Tutorial
1. Editing images
1 How to draw images..............................................................................10
1.1 Drawing curves.............................................................................11
1.2 Erasing images..............................................................................11
1.3 Drawing straight lines...................................................................12
1.4 Replacing color.............................................................................12
1.5 Drawing rectangles.......................................................................12
1.6 Coloring area................................................................................12
1.7 Moving images.............................................................................13
1.8 Copying images............................................................................13
1.9 Copying part other than specified color.......................................13
1.10 Vertical inversion.........................................................................13
1.11 Horizontal inversion.....................................................................14
1.12 Extension and reduction...............................................................14
1.13 Rotation........................................................................................14
1.14 Making image scroll.....................................................................14
1.15 Drawing ellipses...........................................................................15
1.16 Initializing data.............................................................................15
1.17 Changing pen size.........................................................................15
1.18 Selecting TIM bank......................................................................15
1.19 Changing snaps.............................................................................16
1.20 Compressing character.................................................................16
1.21 Releasing specified area selection................................................17
1.22 Specifying rendering color...........................................................18
1.23 Undoing........................................................................................18
1.24 Output to video monitor...............................................................18
1.25 Grid indication..............................................................................18
iv
1.26 Saving only part of image.............................................................19
1.27 Power of displaying paint window...............................................19
2 Editing color palette ..............................................................................20
2.1 Replacing colors on palette ..........................................................20
2.2 Replacing palette..........................................................................21
2.3 Copying color palette ...................................................................21
2.4 Initializing data.............................................................................21
2.5 Developing gradation...................................................................21
2.6 Setting semitransparency..............................................................22
2. Editing cell map
1 Developing cell data..............................................................................25
1.1 Displaying reduced cell window..................................................26
1.2 Copying cell data..........................................................................27
1.3 Vertical inversion.........................................................................27
1.4 Horizontal inversion.....................................................................27
1.5 Initializing data.............................................................................27
1.6 Displaying image area given by cell data.....................................27
1.7 Updating palette for cataloged cell data.......................................28
1.8 Replacing order of cell data..........................................................28
1.9 Cell compression..........................................................................28
2 Developing map data.............................................................................29
2.1 Displaying reduced map window.................................................30
2.2 Copying map data.........................................................................30
2.3 Initializing data.............................................................................30
2.4 Displaying image area given by map data....................................30
2.5 Map output to video monitor........................................................31
3 Setting attributes and semitransparency attributes................................31
3.1 Setting attributes...........................................................................31
3.2 Setting semitransparency..............................................................32
3. Editing animations
1 Developing sprite group data.................................................................37
1.1 Selecting sprite .............................................................................38
1.2 Updating coordinates for cataloged sprite....................................39
1.2 Changing width or height of cataloged sprite...............................39
1.4 Initializing data.............................................................................39
1.5 Changing palette of cataloged sprite ............................................39
1.6 Displaying image area given by sprite data..................................40
1.7 Displaying sprite semitransparently.............................................40
1.8 Rotating sprite ..............................................................................40
1.9 Extending/reducing sprite.............................................................40
1.10 Inverting sprite..............................................................................41
v
1.11 Cataloging sprite along grid.........................................................41
1.12 Priority of sprite displa.................................................................41
2 Editing time table ..................................................................................41
2.1 Modifying offset coordinates for sprite group displayed.............42
2.2 Changing background color for video monitor............................42
Part 2 References
1. Screen configuration
1 Outline...................................................................................................46
2. Menu bar
1 File menu...............................................................................................48
1.1 Opening file..................................................................................48
– Loading saved file (Ctrl+O)
1.2 Saving under name.......................................................................50
– Saving current contents of opened file (Ctrl+S)
1.3 Opening definition file .................................................................52
– Loading project file (Alt+O)
1.4 Saving definition file....................................................................52
– Saving current status into project file (Alt+S)
1.5 Saving all files..............................................................................53
– Saving all opened files (Alt+A)
1.6 Termination ..................................................................................53
– Terminating sprite editor (Alt+X)
2 Editing menu .........................................................................................54
2.1 Undo.............................................................................................54
– Canceling last tool operation (Ctrl+Z)
2.2 Fix.................................................................................................54
– Specifying status to be set up after next undoing (Ctrl+F)
2.3 Redo..............................................................................................54
– Setting up status before cancellation by “undo”
2.4 Cell compression..........................................................................55
– Compressing map data by cell
2.5 Character compression .................................................................55
– Compressing image data by cell
3 Color count menu ..................................................................................56
3.1 256 colors.....................................................................................56
– Making 256 colors available
3.2 16 colors .......................................................................................56
– Making 16 colors available
vi
4 Setting menu..........................................................................................57
4.1 Artist board screen mode................................................................57
– Setting resolution for video monitor
4.2 Items transferred to artist board....................................................57
– Setting contents displayed on video monitor
4.3 Sprite display X offset..................................................................57
– Moving image displayed on video monitor to left (Ctrl+U)
4.4 Sprite display Y offset..................................................................58
– Upward moving image displayed on video monitor (Ctrl+Y)
4.5 Cell size........................................................................................58
– Setting size of sell cut out of image
4.6 Map size........................................................................................58
– Setting whole cell or map size (Ctrl+M)
4.7 Map attribute ................................................................................59
– Setting attributes and semitransparency information in cell
(Ctrl+C)
4.8 Displaying reduced cell................................................................61
– Displaying reduced cell window (Ctrl+E)
4.9 Displaying reduced map...............................................................61
– Displaying reduced map window (Ctrl+W)
4.10 Setting animation..........................................................................62
– Setting animation to be displayed
4.11 Setting snap ..................................................................................63
– Setting snap size for area specification
4.12 Setting grid color..........................................................................64
– Setting grid color
4.13 Setting coordinates for TIM bank.................................................64
– Setting coordinates for TIM bank
5 Display menu.........................................................................................67
5.1 Power............................................................................................67
– Setting power for displaying paint window (Ctrl+R)
5.2 Bank..............................................................................................67
– Selecting bank (Ctrl+B)
5.3 Grid...............................................................................................69
– Displaying grid or no grid (Ctrl+G)
5.4 Reloading......................................................................................69
– Re-rendering with video monitor out of order (Ctrl+P)
6 Window menu .......................................................................................69
6.1 Arranging icons............................................................................69
– Arranging iconic window
6.2 Whole TIM display.......................................................................69
– Activating whole TIM display window
6.3 Displaying cell..............................................................................70
– Activating cell display window
vii
6.4 Displaying map.............................................................................70
– Activating map display window
6.5 Displaying palette.........................................................................70
– Activating palette display window
6.6 Displaying animation....................................................................70
– Activating animation display window
6.7 Display time table.........................................................................70
– Activating time table display window
6.8 Painting.........................................................................................70
– Activating paint window
7 Tool menu..............................................................................................71
7.1 Longitudinal location....................................................................71
– Longitudinally displaying tool palette
7.2 Lateral location.............................................................................71
– Laterally displaying tool palette
3. Tool bar
1 Opening tool..........................................................................................74
– Loading saved file
2 Saving tool.............................................................................................75
– Saving current contents of opened file
3 Grid tool.................................................................................................75
– Displaying grid or no grid
4 Power modification tool........................................................................76
– Setting power of displaying paint window
5 Bank selection tool................................................................................76
– Selecting bank
6 Attribute setting tool..............................................................................77
– Setting attribute
7 Undoing tool..........................................................................................78
– Canceling last tool operation
8 Fixing tool .............................................................................................78
– Setting up status after next undoing
9 Redoing tool ..........................................................................................79
– Setting up status before undoing
10 Screen display tool ................................................................................79
– Setting contents to be displayed on video monitor
11 Right scroll tool.....................................................................................80
– Moving image displayed on video monitor to left
12 Downward scroll tool............................................................................80
– Upward moving image displayed on video monitor
viii
4. Tool palette
1 Pen tool..................................................................................................82
– Drawing curves
2 Eraser tool..............................................................................................83
– Erasing image
3 Straight line drawing tool......................................................................84
– Drawing straight lines
4 Color change tool ..................................................................................84
– Changing colors
5 Rectangle drawing tool..........................................................................85
– Drawing rectangles with rendering color
6 Coloring tool..........................................................................................86
– Coloring area defined by lines with rendering color
7 Moving tool...........................................................................................86
– Moving images
8 Copying tool..........................................................................................87
– Copying images
9 Mask copy tool......................................................................................88
– Mask-copy images
10 Vertical inversion tool...........................................................................88
– Vertical image inversion
11 Horizontal inversion tool.......................................................................89
– Horizontal image inversion
12 Size modification tool............................................................................89
– Extending/reducing and copying image
13 Rotation tool..........................................................................................90
– Rotating image
14 Scroll tool..............................................................................................90
– Making image scroll
15 Ellipse drawing tool...............................................................................91
– Drawing ellipses and circles
16 Total clearing tool..................................................................................92
– Initializing data
17 Cell tool.................................................................................................92
– Cutting out cell data
18 Attribute tool .........................................................................................93
– Setting attributes
19 Animation tool.......................................................................................94
– Cutting out animation data
5. Window
1 Whole TIM display window..................................................................96
2 Cell display window..............................................................................97
3 Map display window.............................................................................98
ix
4 Palette display window..........................................................................99
5 Animation display window..................................................................101
6 Time table display window .................................................................105
7 Paint window.......................................................................................109
8 Window selection................................................................................110
6. Miscellaneous
1 List of short cut keys ...........................................................................112
2 Notes....................................................................................................114
Appendix A Installation
1. Installation
1 Installation...........................................................................................120
Appendix B File formats
1. Specifications of image data (TIM file)
1 Image data file.....................................................................................126
2 Whole file configuration......................................................................126
2.1 ID................................................................................................127
2.2 FLAG..........................................................................................127
2.3 CLUT section.............................................................................128
2.4 Pixel data section........................................................................129
2. Specifications of pixel image data (PXL file)
1 PXL format..........................................................................................132
2 Whole file configuration......................................................................132
2.1 ID................................................................................................133
2.2 FLAG..........................................................................................133
2.3 Pixel data section........................................................................133
3. Specifications of palette data (CLT file)
1 CLT format..........................................................................................136
2 Whole file configuration......................................................................136
2.1 ID................................................................................................137
2.2 FLAG..........................................................................................137
2.3 CLUT section.............................................................................137
4. Specifications of cell data (CEL file)
1 CEL format..........................................................................................140
x
2 File formats..........................................................................................140
2.1 HEADER....................................................................................140
2.2 CELL..........................................................................................141
2.3 ATTR..........................................................................................142
5. Specifications of map data (BGD file)
1 BGD format.........................................................................................144
2 File formats..........................................................................................144
2.1 HEADER....................................................................................144
2.2 MAP ...........................................................................................145
2.3 ATTR..........................................................................................146
6. Specifications of animation data (ANM file)
1 ANM format........................................................................................148
2 File format...........................................................................................148
2.1 HEADER....................................................................................148
2.2 SEQUENCE...............................................................................149
2.3 SPRITEGp..................................................................................149
2.4 CLUTGp.....................................................................................152
7. Animation time sequence file (RSQ file)
1 TSQ format..........................................................................................154
2 File format...........................................................................................154
2.1 HEADER....................................................................................154
2.2 SEQUENCE...............................................................................155
8. Sprite editor project file (SDF file)
1 SDF format..........................................................................................158
2 File format...........................................................................................158
2.1 TIM.............................................................................................158
2.2 CEL.............................................................................................159
2.3 MAP ...........................................................................................159
2.4 ANM...........................................................................................159
2.5 DISPLAY...................................................................................160
2.6 COLOR.......................................................................................160
2.7 ADDR.........................................................................................161
Index ...................................................................................................................163
OVERVIEW
1
Major Features
The DTL-S210A sprite editor is the image data ending tool dedicated to the PlayStation
unit. It provides the capability to interactively create data as sprite and BG picture
components on Windows.
Painting function
This function creates and edits pixel images. It is capable of concurrently editing
four banks.
The created image (TIM file) can also be used as texture for the 3D graphics tool.
Note: Data in the 256-color mode and data in the 16-color mode cannot be edited
concurrently. Concurrently editing two or more pieces of data requires that
the same color mode be applied.
Map creation function
This function locates cells cut out of an image to create a map. The size of a cell to
be cut out must be 8 x 8, 16 x 16, 24 x 24, 32 x 32 or 64 x 64 pixels. The maximum
map size is 256 x 256 cells. Each of the cells located in a map can be assigned an
attribute value. Four maps can be edited concurrently.
Animation creation function
This function cuts a sprite out of an image to create a sprite group and an animation.
Graphics display function
Graphic artist board DTL-H201A allows graphic data having the same color and
resolution as the PlayStation unit to be checked by the video monitor.
Note: With graphic data displayed on the video monitor screen, the processing
speed is lowered compared with such data not displayed.
Remarks
• The Windows video driver for 256 colors should be used. Any drivers for other
than 256 colors cannot be used.
Å°Å° OVERVIEW
2
3
• Up to 236 colors can be displayed concurrently on the Windows screen. Thus, all
colors at the palette display window bottom and the most right four colors on the
second bottom line cannot be edited. When data based on colors of this part has
been loaded, colors displayed on the Windows screen may be different from colors
displayed on the NTSC screen.
• When ABOARD.EXE is not used to set the I/O address of the graphic artist board
again, the region of 0x1340 to 0x134f is used as the I/0 address.
2
Operating Environment
Hardware
IBM PC/AT compatible machine
The hardware satisfying the following requirements is needed.
• CPU operated under 486DX2 (66 MHz) or higher version
• More than 4 M-bytes of empty memory
• Video board of 1024 x 768 (recommended) or more that can display
(required) 256 colors
• Hard disk
Graphic artist board DTL-H201A
This board is fitted on a PC/AT ISA bus slot to connect a video monitor
applicable to NTSC.
Color display for PC/AT
Windows is operated and sprites are edited on a color display for PC/AT.
Video monitor applicable to NYSC
This video monitor allows the inspection of data currently created by the
sprite editor.
Mouse
The mouse is used to operate the sprite editor.
OVERVIEW Å°Å°
4
Å°Å° OVERVIEW
Note
The factory set graphic artist board uses the region of 0x1340 to 0x124F as the
I/O address. This means that the graphic artist board cannot be used along with a
board which uses the region of 0x340 to 0x34F as the I/O address. Change the
duplicate I/O address of another board, or use ABOARD.EXE supplied together
with 3D graphics tool DTL-S220A to change the I/O address of the graphic artist
board.
Software
MS-DOS of version 5.0/V or later version
Windows 3.1
Operated on Japanese Windows 3.1
3
File Formats
The sprite editor supports the following file formats.
TIM
This image format allows data to be transferred directly to the VRAM of the
PlayStation unit. It is composed of color palette data and pixel data.
PXL
This file stores only the pixel data section of a TIM file.
CLT
This file stores only the color palette data section of a TIM file.
5
CEL
This is a table of cells constituting a BG plane. The table can also store attributes.
Each cell is composed of a combination of image coordinates on the VRAM and a
palette used.
BGD
This file stores information on the arrangement of cells defined in the CEL file.
ANM
This format is used to create animations from image data. It is composed of sprite
definitions for each frame and of a time table.
TSQ
This file stores only the time table section in the ANM file.
OVERVIEW Å°Å°Å°
6
Å°Å° OVERVIEW
PART1
TUTORIAL
CHAPTER 1
EDITING IMAGES
This chapter explains the functions used to
render images.
10
Å°Å° CHAPTER 1. EDITING IMAGES
Drawing images involves the use of a whole TIM display window, a paint window, and a
palette display window (see Figure 1-1-1). A rendering color is determined by the color palette
on a palette display window, and a tool on a tool palette is used to edit images on a paint window.
A whole rendered image is displayed on the whole TIM display window,
Figure 1-1-1 During Image Editing
1
How to Draw Images
1. Press the F5 function key on the keyboard to open the whole TIM display
window, the paint window and the palette display window.
2. Set the number of colors used in the color count menu.
Menu
Tool bar
Whole TIM display
window
Palette display window
Icon
Paint window
Tool palette
11
CHAPTER 1. EDITING IMAGES Å°Å°
3. Select “TIM bank coordinate setting” in the setting menu to open the coordinate
setting dialogue box in the TIM bank. Then, specify coordinates of the image on
the VRAM, palette coordinates, and the number of colors set.
4. Select the bank in the display menu. Open the bank setting dialogue box and
specify a TIM bank to be used.
5. Select and create a rendering color on the palette display window.
6. Use a tool on the tool palette to edit images on the paint window.
7. After having edited images, select “saving under name” in the file menu to save
the image as a TIM file.
The sprite editor supports the following image editing functions.
Figure 1-1-2 Tool Palette
1.1 Drawing Curves
1. Select the pen tool on the tool palette (Figure 1-1-2).
2. Select the rendering color on the palette display window.
3. Clicking (dragging) the left button on the paint window enables rendering in the rendering
color. Dragging with the Caps Lock key pressed enables a dashed line to be drawn.
1.2 Erasing Images
1. Select the eraser tool on the tool palette.
2. Clicking (dragging) the left button on the paint window enables rendering in the
background color (color of palette zero).
Pen tool
Eraser tool
Straight line drawing tool
Color changing tool
Rectangle drawing tool
Vertical inversion tool
Mask copy tool
Copying tool
Moving tool
Painting tool
Animation tool
Attribute setting tool
Cell tool
Total clearing tool
Horizontal inversion tool
Size modification tool
Rotation tool
Scroll tool
Ellipse drawing tool
12
Å°Å° CHAPTER 1. EDITING IMAGES
1.3 Drawing Straight Lines
1. Select the straight line drawing tool on the tool palette.
2. Select a rendering color on the palette display window.
3. Dragging on the paint window with the left mouse button pressed enables
rendering in the rendering color.
1.4 Replacing Color
A color in a certain area of image data can be replaced with another color in the
same palette.
1. Select the color change tool on the tool palette.
2. Specify by left dragging an area whose color is to be changed on the paint
window. The default is the whole image in the bank.
3. Select a color to be replaced on the palette display window and click the right
button.
4. Select a new color on the palette display window and click the left button.
1.5 Drawing Rectangles
1. Select the rectangle drawing tool on the tool palette.
2. Left dragging on the paint window leads to the drawing of the rectangle where the
start and end points of the dragging are the edge points of the diagonal.
1.6 Coloring Area
1. Select the coloring tool on the tool palette.
2. Click by the left button the pixel to be colored on the paint window.
13
CHAPTER 1. EDITING IMAGES Å°Å°
1.7 Moving Images
1. Select the moving tool on the tool palette.
2. Specify an area to be moved by left dragging on the paint window (whole TIM
display window).
3. Locate the rectangular frame at the destination position and click the left button.
1.8 Copying Images
1. Select the copying tool on the tool palette.
2. Specify an area to be copied by left dragging on the paint window (whole TIM
display window).
3. Locate the rectangular frame at the destination position and click the left button.
1.9 Copying Part other than Specified Color
1. Select the mask copy tool on the tool palette.
2. Specify an area to be copied by left dragging on the paint window (whole TIM
display window).
3. Locate the rectangular frame at the position to be copied. Then, click the left
button with the shift key pressed. The rendering color becomes while, with the
other parts copied. Clicking the left button without pressing the shift key causes
the background color to become white.
1.10 Vertical Inversion
1. Select the vertical inversion tool on the tool palette.
2. Specify an area to be inverted vertically by left dragging on the paint window.
14
Å°Å° CHAPTER 1. EDITING IMAGES
1.11 Horizontal Inversion
1. Select the horizontal inversion tool on the tool palette.
2. Specify an area to be inverted horizontally by left dragging on the paint window.
1.12 Extension and Reduction
1. Select the size modification tool on the tool palette.
2. Specify an area to be extended or reduced by left dragging on the paint window.
3. Locate the cursor at the intended position, followed by left dragging for the
desired size.
1.13 Rotation
1. Select the rotation tool on the tool palette.
2. Specify an area to be rotated by left dragging on the paint window.
3. Click the arrow button on the scroll bar to rotate the rectangular frame to the
desired angle.
4. Pointing to a position in the paint window, click the left button.
1.14 Making Image Scroll
1. Select the scroll tool on the tool palette.
2. Specify an area to be made to scroll by left dragging on the paint window.
3. Click the arrow button on the scroll bar for scrolling to the desired position. With
the Caps Lock key pressed, the image out of the rectangular frame is not displayed
on the opposite side.
15
CHAPTER 1. EDITING IMAGES Å°Å°
1.15 Drawing Ellipses
1. Select the ellipse drawing tool on the tool palette.
2. Select a rendering color on the palette display window.
3. On the paint window, carry out left dragging from the center of the ellipse toward
the outside.
1.16 Initializing Data
1. Select the total clearing tool on the tool palette.
2. Click the left button on the paint window (whole TIM display window).
1.17 Changing Pen Size
With the Num Lock key pressed, activate the paint window to press numeric keys
1, 2 and 3. The pen size is changed to 1 x 1, 2 x 2 and 3 x 3.
1.18 Selecting TIM Bank
The appropriate TIM bank can be selected by the following three methods.
1. Select display menu “bank” and open the bank setting dialogue box (see Figure
1-1-3). Then, select the number of the desired TIM bank.
2. Use the bank selection tool on the tool bar to open the bank setting dialogue box.
Then, select the number of the desired TIM bank.
3. Press function keys F1 to F4 (banks 0 to 3) on the keyboard.
16
Å°Å° CHAPTER 1. EDITING IMAGES
Figure 1-1-3 Bank Setting Dialogue Box
1.19 Changing Snaps
During area specification, the snap can be changed by the following method.
1. In the setting menu, select Ågsnap settingÅh.
2. Select the desired snap size in the pull-down menu.
1 x 1 Ctrl+1: Allows an area to be specified in units of one pixel.
4 x 4 Ctrl+2: Allows an area to be specified in units of four pixels.
8 x 8 Ctrl+3: Allows an area to be specified in units of eight pixels.
16 x 16 Ctrl+4: Allows an area to be specified in units of 16 pixels.
1.20 Compressing Character
The sprite editor supports a character compression function for erasing duplicate
characters on one piece of TIM (rectangular area of the specified size) and embedding
characters in sequence. The function can also be used to create the cell corresponding
to a compressed image, and map data constituting the original picture.
17
CHAPTER 1. EDITING IMAGES Å°Å°
Figure 1-1-4 Character Compression Dialogue Box
1. Select Ågcharacter compressionÅh in the editing menu, and open the TIM character
compression dialogue (see Figure 1-1-4).
2. Select the TIM bank containing an image to be compressed from the precompression TIM bank in the dialogue box.
3. Select the TIM bank that will store the compressed image from the postcompression TIM bank in the dialogue box.
4. SElect the MAP bank that will store the map data corresponding to the
compressed image from the post-compression MAP bank in the dialogue box.
5. Select the character size. When inserting one blank character around the
compressed image, press the edge character suspension button.
6. Press the OK button. Compression may take about two minutes.
1.21 Releasing Specified Area Selection
The specified area selection can be released by clicking the right button.
18
Å°Å° CHAPTER 1. EDITING IMAGES
1.22 Specifying Rendering Color
The rendering color can be specified by the following two methods.
• Click the left button at the desired color on the palette display window.
• Click the right button at the desired color pixel on the paint window.
1.23 Undoing
Figure 1-1-5 Tool Bar
The sprite editor defaults to selecting a tool on the tool palette and saving the status
right after the first operation into the undo buffer. Thus, undoing after a series of
operation following tool selection sets up the status for tool selection. Pressing the
FIX button on the tool bar (see Figure 1-1-5) causes the current status to be saved in
the undo buffer. Use the FIX button if needed.
1.24 Output to Video Monitor
Selecting the sprite button on the tool bar enables image data currently edited (contents of
the whole TIM display window) to be output from graphics artist board DTL-H201A to the
video monitor. Further, the resolution of the video monitor can be modified in the pull-down
menu by selecting the “artist board screen mode” in the setting menu. If coordinates of images
and palettes in the TIM bank occupy an area on the VRAM needed for display at the specified
resolution, however, the resolution cannot be modified. IN such a case, set coordinates of the
TIM bank in the setting menu so that coordinates of images and palettes do not share the display
area and, then, specify the desired resolution.
1.25 Grid Indication
The grid can be displayed and grid display can be suppressed by clicking the grid
tool on the tool bar. Opening the grid color setting dialogue box with “grid color
setting” selected in the setting menu enables the display colors of the main grid and
sun-grid to be changed.
Opening tool
Saving tool
Grid tool
Power modification tool
Redoing tool
Fixing tool
Undoing tool
Attribute setting tool
Bank selection tool
Downward scroll tool
Right scroll tool
Sprite button
Map button
Animation button
Non-button
19
CHAPTER 1. EDITING IMAGES Å°Å°
1.26 Saving only Part of Image
Figure 1-1-6 TIM Output Information Dialogue Box
When a TIM file is saved, the TIM output information dialogue box (see Figure
1-1-6) is opened. Specifying coordinates and size in image data in the dialogue box
enables the TIM file for only the specified area to be saved.
1.27 Power of Displaying Paint Window
The following three methods can be used to change the power of displaying the
paint window.
• Select “power” in the display menu, open the display power setting dialogue box,
and set the display power.
• Select the power changing tool on the tool palette, open the display power setting
dialogue box, and set the display power.
• Press function key F9 (high extension rate) or F9 (low extension rate) along with
the shift key on the keyboard.
The area extended in the paint window is displayed as the rectangular frame on the
whole TIM display window. The area can be moved to the position specified by
clicking the right button on the whole TIM display window.
20
Å°Å° CHAPTER 1. EDITING IMAGES
2
Editing Color Palette
Figure 1-1-7 Palette display window
The color palette is edited on the palette display window (see Figure 1-1-7). The
red, green and blue scroll bars are used to set colors. In the sprite editor, the color of
number zero on the palette provides the background color. In the 256-color mode, the
top left color provides the background color. In the 16-color mode, the left edge color
on the palette provides the background color. The rendering color can be specified by
clicking the left button. In the 256-color mode, the whole palette display window
provides one palette. In the 16-color mode, the lateral row provides one palette.
2.1 Replacing Colors on Palette
In the palette, a color can be replaced by another color.
1. Select the color change tool on the tool palette.
2. Click the right button on the palette display window to select the rendering color
to be replaced.
3. With the shift (or Ctrl) key pressed, click the left button on the palette display
window to specify the other rendering color to be substituted. Specification with
the shift key pressed leads to the swapping of color information in the TIM image.
The image on the paint window is not changed. Specification with the Ctrl key
pressed does not lead to the swapping of color information in the TIM image.
Thus, image appearance on the paint window is changed.
Front background
color display area
Semitransparent
area button
Semitransparency button
21
CHAPTER 1. EDITING IMAGES Å°Å°
2.2 Replacing Palette
In the 16-color mode, the palette can be replaced.
1. Select the color change tool on the tool palette.
2. Click the right button on the palette display window to select one color in the
palette to be replaced.
3. With the shift and Ctrl keys pressed, click the left button at one color in the
palette to be substituted.
2.3 Copying Color Palette
1. Select the copying tool on the tool palette.
2. Specify the area to be copied by left dragging on the palette display window.
3. Locate the rectangular frame at the destination position and click the left button.
2.4 Initializing Data
1. Select the total clearing tool on the tool palette.
2. Click the left button on the palette display window.
2.5 Developing Gradation
1. Click the left button on the palette display window to select the rendering color to
be subjected to gradation.
2. Press the gradation button on the palette display window.
3. Click the left button at the other color to be subjected to gradation on the palette
display window. If a line or column on the palette display window does not
contain the first selected rendering color and the other selected color, no gradation
is developed.
22
Å°Å° CHAPTER 1. EDITING IMAGES
2.6 Setting Semitransparency
Setting the transparency control bit (STP bit in the CLUT entry for TIM data) at
one in the color palette involves the following operation.
1. Click the left button at the color whose STP bit is to be made one on the palette
display window for selection.
2. Turn on the semitransparency button on the palette display window.
Dragging the palette display window by the left button with the semitransparent
area button turned on sets the status of the semitransparency button at the color in the
area.
CHAPTER 2
EDITING CELL MAP
This chapter explains a procedure for combining cells to create map data on the background plane.
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. EDITING CELL MAP
Figure 1-2-1 Data Flow during Cell Map Editing
The sprite editor creates palette information and coordinate information of images laid on
the map on the VRAM, as cell data. Coordinate information is cataloged as cell data by
specifying areas on four TIM banks. Palette information is cataloged as cell data by
specifying a palette. Cataloging coordinate and palette information requires that an area be
selected on the whole TIM display window, a desired color in the palette be selected on the
palette display window, and the area in the cell display window be clicked. Information on
how the created cell data is be arranged is generated as map data. Selecting the area to be
pasted onto the map in the cell display window and clicking the pasting position on the map
display window lead to the cataloging of the information (see Figure 1-2-1).
24
CHAPTER 2. EDITING CELL MAP Å°Å°
1
Developing Cell Data
Figure 1-2-2 Location during Cell Map Editing
The following detailed explanation is based on sample data.
1. Press the F6 function key on the keyboard to open the whole TIM display
window, the cell display window and the map display window to be located
properly (see Figure 1-2-2).
2. Set the size of the cell to be cut out by “cell size” in the setting menu, at 32 x 32.
3. Select “map size” in the setting menu, open the map cell specification dialogue
box, and set X size in the cell file at 16 and Y size at 16.
4. Select “cell tool” on the tool palette.
5. Select “bank” in the display menu and, then, TIM bank 0 for the image to be
cataloged as the cell.
6. Use the opening tool on the tool bar to load C:¥PSXGRAPH¥TUTORIAL
¥SPRITE¥MAP.TIM.
7. Click by the left button the top left edge of the rectangular area to be cut out in the
whole TIM display window, or drag the area to be cut out by the left button.
25
Whole TIM display window
Cell display window
Map display window
26
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. EDITING CELL MAP
8. Click the left button at the position where the cell cut out in the cell display
window is to be located (see Figure 1-2-3). (For the cataloged cell data, refer to
the palette covering the rendering color used when the left button is clicked.)
Figure 1-2-3 Cell Data Creation
Now, cell data has been created. Data at the left top on the cell display window is
laid on the map display window. This is because the initial map data value is based on
the first cell. The following describes the operation applicable to the cell data.
1.1 Displaying Reduced Cell Window
The default is such that the cell display window is displayed in a somewhat large
scale. Checking “reduced cell display” in the setting menu allows the cell to be
reduced and displayed.
Figure 1-2-4 Tool Palette
Pen tool
Eraser tool
Straight line drawing tool
Color change tool
Rectangle drawing tool
Vertical inversion tool
Mask copy tool
Copying tool
Moving tool
Coloring tool
Animation tool
Attribute setting tool
Cell tool
Total clearing tool
Horizontal inversion tool
Size modification tool
Rotation tool
Scroll tool
Ellipse drawing tool
27
CHAPTER 2. EDITING CELL MAP Å°Å°
1.2 Copying Cell Data
1. Select the copying tool on the tool palette (see Figure 1-2-4).
2. Specify an area to be copied by left dragging on the cell display window.
3. Locate the rectangular frame at the destination position and click the left button.
1.3 Vertical Inversion
1. Select the vertical inversion tool on the tool palette.
2. Specify an area to be inverted vertically by left dragging on the cell display
window.
1.4 Horizontal Inversion
1. Select the horizontal inversion tool on the tool palette.
2. Specify an area to be inverted horizontally by left dragging on the cell display
window.
1.5 Initializing Data
1. Select the total clearing tool on the tool palette.
2. Click the left button on the cell display window. The initial cell data value refers
to the cell beginning with (0, 0) in TIM bank 0.
1.6 Displaying Image Area Given by Cell Data
The image area pointed to by the cataloged cell data can be indicated. The
following gives the procedure for this indication.
1. Select the cell tool on the tool palette.
2. Clicking the right button on the cell display window leads to the display of the
area corresponding to the cell on the whole TIM display window. Also, the
following information is displayed at the center of the status bar.
PALETTE: Palette number
TIMBANK: Bank number (x and y coordinates)
28
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. EDITING CELL MAP
1.7 Updating Palette for Cataloged Cell Data
Palette information cataloged as cell data can be updated. This updating involves
the following operation.
1. Select the pen tool on the tool palette.
2. Select the cell whose palette is to be updated, by left dragging on the cell display
window.
3. Clicking the right button at a color in the desired palette on the palette display
window causes the palette information to be cataloged as cell data.
1.8 Replacing Order of Cell Data
On the cell display window, cell numbers are arranged from the top left to the right.
Because the cell numbers are cataloged as map data, the map is changed if cell data
location has been updated. By the following operation, however, the position on the
cell display window can be changed without updating the map.
1. Select the color change tool on the tool palette.
2. Click the left button at the cell to be replaced on the cell display window.
3. Click the left button at the cell to be substituted on the cell display window.
1.9 Cell Compression
A cell compression function is supported for erasing duplicate cells cataloged as
cell data and arranging the other cells from the start of cell data. The function allows
cell information for the corresponding map data to be updated so that the map data is
not destroyed.
1. Select “cell compression” in the editing menu. The compression may take about
two minutes.
29
CHAPTER 2. EDITING CELL MAP Å°Å°
2
Developing Map Data
This section explains a method of developing map data from created cell data. This
explanation is based on sample data.
1. Press the F6 function key on the keyboard to open the cell display window and the
map display window to be located properly.
2. Select “map size” in the setting menu, open the map cell size specification
dialogue box, and set the map file size at 128 x 128.
3. Select “bank” in the display menu and, then, map bank 0 to be used.
4. With TIM bank 0 selected, use the opening tool on the tool bar to load
C:¥PSXGRAPH¥TUTORIAL¥SPRITE¥MAP.TIM and
C:¥PSXGRAPH¥TUTORIAL¥SPRITE¥MAP.CEL.
5. Select “pen tool” on the tool palette.
6. Click the left button at the cell to be located as map data on the cell display
window, or drag the area by the left button.
7. Click the left button at the position where the cell is to be located, on the map
display window.
Figure 1-2-5 Map Data Creation
30
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. EDITING CELL MAP
Now, map data has been created. The following explains the operation applicable
to such map data.
2.1 Displaying Reduced Map Window
The default is such that the map display window is displayed in a somewhat large
scale. Checking “reduced map display” in the setting menu enables the map window
to be displayed at a reduced scale.
2.2 Copying Map Data
1. Select the copying tool on the tool palette.
2. Specify an area to be copied by left dragging on the map display window.
3. Click the left button with the rectangular frame located at the destination position.
2.3 Initializing Data
1. Select the total clearing tool on the tool palette.
2. Click the left button on the map display window. The initial map data value refers
to the cell of cell data 0.
2.4 Displaying Image Area Given by Map Data
The cell data and image region pointed to by cataloged map data can be indicated.
This indication involves the following operation.
1. Select the cell tool on the tool palette.
2. Clicking the right button on the map display window allows the display of the area
corresponding to the cell on the whole TIM display window. Also, the cell corresponding to the cell display window is displayed, and the following information
is given at the center of the status bar.
CellNo.: Cell number (x and y coordinates on the cell display window)
31
CHAPTER 2. EDITING CELL MAP Å°Å°
2.5 Map Output to Video Monitor
Map data currently edited can be output to the video monitor by selecting the map
button on the tool bar. But this output requires that the transfer MAP BANK button
have been turned on in the bank setting dialogue box (see Figure 1-2-6) that can open
the bank selection tool on the tool bar. The bank numbers are displayed in ascending
order away form yourself.
Figure 1-2-6 Bank Setting Dialogue Box
3
The sprite editor can assign attributes to cell data and map data. Also, cell data can
be assigned semitransparency attributed.
3.1 Setting Attributes
1. Select “attribute setting tool” on the tool palette.
Setting Attributes and
Semitransparency Attributes
32
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. EDITING CELL MAP
Figure 1-2-7 Attribute and Semitransparency Attribute Setting Dialogue Box
2. Select “map attribute” in the setting menu to open the attribute and semitransparency setting dialogue box (see Figure 1-2-7).
3. Turn on the attribute setting button.
4. Turn on the “attributed supported” button for the desired data. Setting an attribute
value of more than 255 requires that the “16-bit attribute” button be turned on.
Entering an attribute value to be displayed in a decimal number requires that the
decimal number button be pressed. For a hexadecimal number, press the
hexadecimal number button.
5. Enter an attribute value.
6. On the window which displays the desired data (cell or map display), click the left
button at the cell where the entered attribute is to be set, or drag the area to be set
by the left button.
7. For termination, click the close button by the left button to close the dialogue box.
3.2 Setting Semitransparency
1. Select “attribute tool” on the tool palette.
33
CHAPTER 2. EDITING CELL MAP Å°Å°
2. Select “map attribute” in the setting menu to open the attribute and semitransparency setting dialogue box.
3. Turn on the semitransparency setting button.
4. Turn on the button for the desired semitransparency rate.
5. Click the left button at the cell whose semitransparency rate is to be set on the cell
display window, or drag the area to be set by the left button.
6. For termination, click the close button by the left button to close the dialogue box.
34
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. EDITING CELL MAP
CHAPTER 3
EDITING ANIMATIONS
This chapter explains a procedure for creating sprite animation data.
Å°Å° CHAPTER 3. EDITING ANIMATIONS
Animation creation calls for opening the whole TIM display window, the
animation display window and the time table display window. A rectangular area is
cut out of the whole TIM display window for the animation window to create
animation source data and a time table that indicates display timing.
The sprite editor catalogs two or more sprites to the animation display window to
create a frame of an animation. This is referred to as a sprite group. A needed number
of sprite groups can be cataloged to the animation display window. Use the time table
display window to set the order and timing of displaying the sprite groups.
Figure 1-3-1 During Animation Editing
36
Animation display
window
Time table display window
CHAPTER 3. EDITING ANIMATIONS Å°Å°
1
Developing Sprite Group Data
The following explanation is based on sample data.
1. Press the F7 function key on the keyboard to open the whole TIM display window
and the animation display window.
2. Select the opening tool on the tool bar to load the TIM bank [0, 1, 2, 3] with
C:¥PSXGRAPH¥TUTORIAL¥SPRITE¥MAT [0, 1, 2, 3].TIM.
3. Select “animation tool” on the tool palette.
4. Press the Align button on the animation display window.
5. Press the F1 function key to select TIM bank 0. Then, click by the left button the
grid 8 x 8 position from the top left corner on the whole TIM display window to
select the rectangular area (sprite). (Now, a sprite of 64 x 64 pixels has been
selected.)
6. Click by the left button the grid 7 x 7 position on the sprite display window. On
the sprite group display window, information on the sprite cut out is displayed.
The sprite refers to the palette covering the rendering color during sprite
cataloging.
Figure 1-3-2 Cataloging Sprite
37
38
Å°Å° CHAPTER 3. EDITING ANIMATIONS
7. Locate a needed number of sprites (see Figure 1-3-2). Sprite data is cataloged as it
is located on the sprite display window. The top left corner on the sprite display
window provides the origin of the coordinate system. During actual rendering, the
offset coordinates specified by a time table are added to the coordinate system.
8. After the needed sprites have been cataloged, isolate them for each frame. For this
isolation, click by the left button the boundary sprite on the sprite group display
window before pressing the Head button. A value at the left edge on the sprite group
display window indicates a sprite group number, which is to be specified during time
table creation. The section from the sprite assigned a sprite group number to the sprite
assigned the next number is considered to be a sprite group. The number of sprite
groups corresponds to the number of frames (see Figure 1-3-3).
Figure 1-3-3 Cataloging Sprite Group
Now, sprite group data has been created. The following describes the operation
applicable to the sprite group.
1.1 Selecting Sprite
The following two methods can be used to select a sprite.
• Click the left button on the sprite display window.
• Click the left button on the sprite group display window. The use of the left button
along with the shift and Ctrl keys enables the selection of more than one sprite.
Sprite group display window
Sprite display window
Cross cursor key
39
CHAPTER 3. EDITING ANIMATIONS Å°Å°
1.2 Updating Coordinates for Cataloged Sprite
1. Select the sprite to be moved on the animation display window.
2. Clicking the cross cursor button causes the specified sprite to be moved. With the
x 8 button turned on, the sprite is moved in units of eight pixels.
1.3 Changing Width or Height of Cataloged Sprite
1. On the animation display window, select the sprite whose width or height is to be
changed.
2. Operate the X size scroll bar to set the desired width.
3. Operate the Y size scroll bar to set the desired height.
1.4 Initializing Data
1. Select the total clearing tool on the tool palette.
2. Click the left button on the sprite display window.
1.5 Changing Palette of Cataloged Sprite
Sprite group data carries information on the palette referred to by the sprite. The
stored palette covers the rendering color during sprite cataloging. Even after
cataloging, the palette to be referred to can be changed as follows.
1. Select the animation tool on the tool palette.
2. On the animation display window, select the sprite for which the palette is to be
changed.
3. On the palette display window, click a color in the desired palette by the right
button.
40
Å°Å° CHAPTER 3. EDITING ANIMATIONS
1.6 Displaying Image Area Given by Sprite Data
The image area pointed to by the cataloged sprite can be indicated. This indication
involves the following operation.
1. Select the animation tool on the tool palette.
2. Clicking by the right button the desired sprite on the sprite display window
displays the area corresponding to the sprite on the whole TIM display window.
1.7 Displaying Sprite Semitransparently
The semitransparency mode can be turned on and off, and the semitransparency
rate can be set for each sprite.
1. On the animation display window, select a sprite to be displayed semitransparently.
2. On the animation display window, turn on the semitransparency button.
3. Out of the F/2+B/2, F+B, -F+B and F/4+B buttons, select the desired semitransparency rate. Only on the video monitor, the sprite is displayed semitransparently.
On Windows, the sprite is not displayed semitransparently.
1.8 Rotating Sprite
1. Select the sprite to be rotated on the animation display window.
2. Operate the scroll bar to set the desired rotation angle. Upon rotation, only the
frame is displayed on the animation display window.
1.9 Extending/reducing Sprite
1. Select the sprite to be extended or reduced on the animation display window.
2. Operate the X Zoom scroll bar to set the rate of extension of reduction in the X
direction. Operate the Y Zoom scroll bar to set the rate of extension or reduction
in the Y direction
41
CHAPTER 3. EDITING ANIMATIONS Å°Å°
1.10 Inverting Sprite
1. Select the sprite to be inverted on the animation display window.
2. For horizontal inversion, turn on the H Flip button.
3. For vertical inversion, turn on the V Flip button.
1.11 Cataloging Sprite along Grid
With the Align button turned on, the sprites cataloged in the sprite display
window are located along the grid (in units of eight pixels).
1.12 Priority of Sprite Display
In the same sprite group, the sprites below the sprite group display window are
displayed nearer yourself than the sprites above the sprite group display window.
2
Editing Time Table
This section explains how to create the time table corresponding to created sprite
group data.
1. After the needed sprite group has been cataloged, open the time table display
window (see Figure 1-3-4) and click the [Ins] button by the left button to display
the sprite group.
2. Use the scroll bar for “group”, “time” and “attribute” to set a sprite group number,
display time in units of 1/60 seconds and attributes.
3. Select the animation button on the tool bar.
4. Clicking the “Start” button by the left button displays an animation on the video
monitor. On Windows, no animation is displayed. Clicking the right mouse
button causes the animation to be terminated.
42
Å°Å° CHAPTER 3. EDITING ANIMATIONS
Figure 1-3-4 Cataloging Time Table
Now, the time table has been created. The following describes the operation
applicable to the time table.
2.1 Modifying Offset Coordinates for Sprite Group
Displayed
Display offset coordinates for the cataloged sprite group can be set. Display offset
coordinates are coordinates of the origin of the sprite group in the display area. Such
coordinates are displayed at the right edge of the list on the time table display window.
1. On the time table display window, select the sprite group to be modified.
2. Clicking the cross cursor button causes offset coordinates of the sprite group to be
modified. With the x 8 button turned on, such offset coordinates are modified in
units of eight pixels.
2.2 Changing Background Color for Video Monitor
Selecting the BG Color button on the time table display window enables changes in
the background color displayed by the color setting dialogue box.
PART2
REFERENCES
CHAPTER 1
SCREEN
CONFIGURATION
1
Outline
The following gives the basic screen configuration of the sprite editor.
Figure 2-1-1
The screen is composed of the menu bar, the tool bar, the tool palette, the status bar, and
some windows.
The windows not used can be placed as icons at the bottom of the application window.
But they cannot be closed.
Å°Å°Å° CHAPTER 1. SCREEN CONFIGURATION
46
Paint window
Tool palette
Menu
Tool bar
Whole TIM
display window
Palette display
window
Icon
CHAPTER 2
MENU BAR
This chapter explains the functions of commands which can be started up from the menu
bar for each menu.
1
File Menu
1.1 Opening File - Loading saved file.
1. Select “opening file”.
2. Select the directory where the file is saved, and the file name.
3. Click the OK button by the left button.
Files
TIM file: Displays a list of TIM files (*.TIM).
CELL file: Displays a list of CEL files (*.CEL).
BGD file: Displays a list of BGD files (*.BGD).
ANIM file: Displays a list of ANM files (*.ANM).
CLT file: Displays a list of CLT files (*.CLT).
PXL file: Displays a list of PXL files (*.PXL).
CLS file: Displays a list of CLS files (*.CLS).
TSQ file: Displays a list of TSQ files (*.TSQ).
All file: Displays a list of all files.
Remarks
• The selected file is not loaded into the currently active window, but into the window
corresponding to the file type (extension).
Selected file Corresponding window
TIM file (*.TIM) ® Whole TIM display window
Paint window
Palette display window
CEL file (*.CEL) ® Cell display window
BGD file (*.BGD) ® Map display window
ANM file (*.ANM) ® Animation display window
Time table display window
CLT file (*.CLT) ® Palette display window
PXL file (*.PXL) ® Whole TIM display window
Paint window
CLS file (*.CLS) ® Palette display window
TSQ file (*.TSQ) ® Time table display window
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR
48
49
• The TIM, BGD and PXL files are loaded into the currently selected bank. When
using two or more banks, make sure that the bank is for loading the file, before
opening it.
• The CLT file is loaded into the palette with the current color set number.
• During editing in the 256-color mode, opening a TIM file in the 16-color mode leads
to the conversion of all data being edited into the 16-color mode. Data converted into
the 16-color mode cannot be returned to the 256-color mode.
• During file opening, coordinates of the current TIM bank are updated on the basis of
coordinates of images and palettes in the file.
• Opening the CLS file leads to the overwriting of the color set in the currently active
bank.
• When the TSQ file is opened, the dialogue box (see Figure 2-2-1) for loading the time
table is opened, with the loading position checked. Selecting OVER causes the
current time table to be replaced. Selecting INSERT leads to insertion into the current
cursor position on the time table display window.
Figure 2-2-1 Dialogue Box for Loading Time Table
• During the loading of the TIM, CEL and ANM files, coordinates of the TIM bank
replace coordinates stored in the file. Upon loading a file, check this replacement.
Short Cut: “Open tool” and “Ctrl+O” on tool bar
CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR Å°Å°Å°
50
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR
1.2 Saving under Name - Saving current contents of opened file
1. Select “saving under name”.
2. Specify a directory for saving the file and enter a file name.
3. Click the “OK” button by the left button.
Remarks
• The data saved is not data in the currently active window, but data in the window
corresponding to the selected file (extension).
Selected file Corresponding window
TIM file (*.TIM) ® Whole TIM display window
Paint window
Palette display window
CEL file (*.CEL) ® Cell display window
BGD file (*.BGD) ® Map display window
ANM file (*.ANM) ® Animation display window
Time table display window
CLT file (*.CLT) ® Palette display window
PXL file (*.PXL) ® Whole TIM display window
Paint window
CLS file (*.CLS) ® Palette display window
TSQ file (*.TSQ) ® Time table display window
• Data in the currently selected bank is saved into the TIM, BGD and PXL files.
Through bank selection, save data in two or more banks. The palette with the
currently selected color set number is saved into the CLT file.
• During TIM file output, the TIM output information dialogue box (see Figure 2-2-2)
is opened, with the subsequent information checked.
51
Figure 2-2-2 TIM Output Information Dialogue Box
Item Description
x coordinate of image section ® x coordinate on the VRAM of the top left edge
point in the image area
y coordinate of image section ® y coordinate on the VRAM of the top left edge
point in the image area
x coordinate of palette section ® x coordinate on the VRAM of the top left edge
point in the palette area
y coordinate of palette section ® y coordinate on the VRAM of the top left edge
point in the palette area
Area specification (x coordinate) ® x coordinate of the top left edge point of the
desired file output area in current active TIM data
Area specification (y coordinate) ® y coordinate of the top left edge point of the
desired file output area in current active TIM data
Area specification (Width) ® Width of the desired file output area in current
active TIM data
Area specification (Height) ® Height of the desired file output area in current
active TIM data
Number of 16-color palettes ® Number of 16-color palettes output (only in the
16-color mode)
Short Cut: “Save tool” and “Ctrl+S” on the tool bar
CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR Å°Å°
52
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR
1.3 Opening Definition File - Loading project file
The sprite editor supports a group of files edited and an SDF file that stores set
information. Loading the SDF file enables the setting at a tile of applicable TIM, PXL,
CLT, CEL, BGD and ANM, and the artist board screen mode, the number of colors,
and TIM bank coordinates. Selecting “definition file saving” in the file menu causes
the above information to be saved in the SDF file. The SDF file, which is a text file,
can be edited by the text editor. For the TIM, PXL, CLT, CEL, BGD and ANM files,
only file names are saved. Separately save files themselves.
1. Select “definition file opening”.
2. Select the directory where the project file (SDF file) is saved, and a file name.
3. Click the “OK” button by the left button.
Remarks
• Should the project file contain an error, the description from the line where the error
is detected onward is not reflected.
Short Cut: [Alt+O]
1.4 Saving Definition File - Saving current status into project file
1. Select “definition file saving”.
2. Specify the directory where the file is to be saved, and enter a file name.
3. Click the “OK” button by the left button.
Remarks
• For data in the TIM bank, the file names of PXL and CLT files are saved, only when
the TIM file has not been loaded.
53
• Even though the project file has been saved, the data files are not saved. Thus, they
must be saved separately.
Short Cut: [Alt+S]
1.5 Saving All Files - Saving all opened files
1. Select “all file saving”.
Remarks
• Only the opened TIM, PXL, CLT, CEL, MAP and ANM files are saved. Data having
no file name is not saved.
Short Cut: [Alt+A]
1.6 Termination - Terminating sprite editor
1. Select “termination”.
Shot Cut: [Alt+X]
CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR Å°Å°Å°
54
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR
2
Editing Menu
2.1 Undo - Canceling last tool operation
1. Select “undo”.
Example
Executing “undo” after having used “straight line drawing tool” to consecutively
draw five straight lines causes the five straight lines to disappear. Executing “undo”
after having used “straight line drawing tool” to three straight lines and then using
“pen tool” to draw a curve causes only the curve to disappear.
Remarks
• The default is such that the status immediately preceding the first operation after the
selection of a tool on the tool palette by the sprite editor is saved in the undo buffer.
Thus, executing undo after tool selection and operation sets up the status for the tool
selection. Pressing the FIX button on the tool bar causes the current status to be
saved in the undo buffer. It is recommended that the FIX button be used if needed.
Short Cut: “Undo tool” (Ctrl+Z) on the tool bar
2.2 Fix - Specifying status to be set up after next “undoing”
1. Select “fix”.
Remarks
• The contents of the undo buffer are updated according to the current status.
Short Cut: “Fix tool” (Ctrl+F) on the tool bar
2.3 Redo - Setting status before cancellation
1. Immediately after having executed “undo”, select “redo”.
2. The status before executing “undo” is set up.
Short Cut: “Redo tool” (Ctrl+A) on the tool bar
55
2.4 Cell Compression - Compressing map data by cell
1. Select “cell compression”.
Remarks
• The duplicate cells cataloged in the cell display window are erased, with the
remaining cells arranged from the start of cell data. The cell number of map data is
also replaced and, thus, map data is not destroyed.
• Compression may take about two minutes.
2.5 Character compression - Compressing image data by cell
Figure 2-2-3 Character Compression Dialogue Box
1. Select “character compression”.
2. Open the TIM character compression dialogue box (see Figure 2-2-3). Select the
pre-compression TIM bank, the post-compression TIM bank, the post-compression
MAP bank, character size, and line end character segmentation turn-off button.
CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR Å°Å°Å°
56
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR
Remarks
• The sprite editor can erase the duplicate characters on a TIM unit (rectangular area of
the specified size), and arrange the remaining characters downward. Also, it catalogs
compressed images in a TIM bank into another bank. Further, the cell corresponding
to a compressed image is cataloged into the cell display window, with original
component map data cataloged into the map display window.
• Post-compression TIM bank data, post-compression MAP bank data, and cell data are
overwritten.
• Selecting the line end character segmentation turn-off button provides compression
without using the area around the compressed TIM bank for four vertical and
horizontal characters.
• Compression may take about two minutes.
3
Color Count Menu
The set number of colors is reflected in all window banks. For using the cell
display window, the map display window or the animation display window for
operation, the set number of colors must not be changed. Changing the number of
colors during editing may destroy the past contents of operation.
3.1 256 Colors - Making 256 colors available
1. Select “256 colors”.
3.2 16 Colors - Making 16 colors available
1. Select “16 colors”.
57
4
Setting Menu
4.1 Artist Board Screen Mode - Setting resolution for video monitor
1. Select “artist board screen mode”.
2. Select the desired resolution in the pull-down menu.
Remarks
• Should the area used by TIM data be part of the display area, that screen mode cannot
be used. The display area has the size indicated by the screen mode beginning with
(0, 0) on the V-RAM. For the interlace screen mode, however, the size in the y axis
direction is 480. For example, with (320, 0) specified in coordinates for a TIM bank,
the available screen modes are only 256 x 240, 320 x 240, 256 x 480, and 320 x 480.
The other resolution cannot be used as the area used by the TIM bank is part of the
display area.
4.2 Items Transferred to Artist Board
- Setting contents displayed on video monitor
1. Select “items transferred to artist board”.
2. Select the desired window contents in the pull-down menu.
Sprite: Displays the contents of the whole TIM display window.
Map: Displays the contents of the map display window.
Animation: Displays animations.
None: Displays none on the video monitor. (In this mode, data can be edited
in high speed.)
Short Cut: “Sprite button”, “map button”, “animation button”, and “nonbutton” as screen display tools
4.3 Sprite Display X Offset
- Moving image displayed on video monitor to left
If this menu has been selected, the TIM image to the right of the currently
displayed image is covered on the video monitor.
Remarks
• This menu is used when TIM data of 256 x 256 cannot be displayed on the video
monitor.
Short Cut: “Right scroll tool” (Ctrl+U) on the tool bar
CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR Å°Å°Å°
58
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR
4.4 Sprite Display Y Offset
- Upward moving image displayed on video monitor
If this menu has been selected, the TIM image below the currently displayed image
is covered on the video monitor.
Remarks
• This menu is used when TIM data of 256 x 256 cannot be displayed on the video
monitor.
Short Cut: “Downward scroll tool” (Ctrl+Y) on the tool bar
4.5 Cell Size - Setting size of cell cut out of image
1. Select “cell size”.
2. Select the desired size in the pull-down menu.
Remarks
• The cell size can be selected from 8 ´ 8, 16 ´ 16, 24 ´ 24, 32 ´ 32, and 64 ´ 6 4
pixels.
4.6 Map Size - Setting whole cell or map size
Figure 2-2-4 Map Cell Size Specification Dialogue Box
59
1. Select “map size”. The map size specification dialogue box (see Figure 2-2-4) is
displayed.
2. Enter the desired size and click the “OK” button by the left button.
Remarks
• Up to 256 x 256 cells of map size can be set.
• Sizes of up to 64 x 64 cells can be set.
Short Cut: [Ctrl+M]
4.7 Map Attribute
- Setting attributes and semitransparency information in cell
Figure 2-2-5 Attribute and Semitransparency Setting Dialogue Box
• Setting attribute
1. Select “attribute tool” on the tool palette.
CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR Å°Å°Å°
60
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR
2. Select “map attribute”. The attribute and semitransparency setting dialogue box
(see Figure 2-2-5) is displayed.
3. Turn on the attribute setting button.
4. Turn on “attribute supported” for the desired data. When setting an attribute value
of more than 255, turn on “16-bit attribute”. When entering and displaying a
decimal attribute value, press the decimal number button. For a hexadecimal
number, press the hexadecimal number button.
5. Enter an attribute value.
6. Click the cell for which the attribute is to be set, by the left button, or drag the
setting area by the left button.
7. Click the close button by the left button during termination.
• Setting semitransparency information
1. Select “attribute tool” on the tool palette.
2. Select “map attribute”. The attribute and semitransparency setting window is
displayed.
3. Turn on the semitransparency setting button.
4. Set the desired semitransparency rate.
5. On the cell display window, click the cell to be made semitransparent by the left
button, or drag the area to be made semitransparent by the left button.
6. During termination, click the close button by the left button.
61
Remarks
• With “16-bit attribute” turned on, any attribute values of 0 to 65535 can be set.
• Semitransparency settings are not displayed on the window. Thus, check such
settings on the video monitor.
Short Cut: [Ctrl+C]
4.8 Displaying Reduced Cell - Displaying reduced cell window
1. Select “reduced cell display”.
Remarks
• Selecting “reduced cell display” under reduction sets the typical size.
Short Cut: [Ctrl+E]
4.9 Displaying Reduced Map - Displaying reduced map window
1. Select “reduced map display”.
Remarks
• Selecting “reduced map display” under reduction sets the typical size.
Short Cut: [Ctrl+W]
CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR Å°Å°Å°
62
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR
4.10 Setting Animation - Setting animation to be displayed
Figure 2-2-6 Animation Setting Dialogue Box
• For some video boards, the sprite cut out may not be displayed on the animation
display window. In such a case, turn on the button on the animation setting window.
1. Select “animation setting”. The animation setting dialogue box (see Figure 2-2-6)
is displayed.
2. Turn on the button on the animation setting dialogue box.
3. Click the “OK” button by the left button.
• When an animation is displayed on the video monitor and map data is displayed at the
background of the sprite, turn on the center button on the animation setting window.
However, the processing speed is lowered significantly, with the whole sprite not
displayed or some frames not covered.
63
1. Select “animation setting”. The animation setting window is displayed.
2. Turn on the center button on the animation setting window.
3. Click the “OK” button by the left button.
• When displaying a sprite including one pixel at the bottom or right edge in a texture
page, turn on the button at the bottom of the animation setting window if the sprite is
smaller than the specified size by one pixel. With the button turned off, the sprite is
displayed in the specified size, but its center pixel is extended.
1. Select “animation setting”. The animation setting dialogue box is displayed.
2. Turn on the button at the bottom of the animation setting window.
3. Click the “OK” button by the left button.
4.11 Setting Snap - Setting snap size for area specification
1. Select “snap setting”.
2. Select the desired snap size in the pull-down menu.
1´1 (Ctrl+1): The area can be specified by pixel.
4´4 (Ctrl+2): The area can be specified by four pixels.
8´8 (Ctrl+3): The area can be specified by eight pixels.
16´16 (Ctrl+4): The area can be specified by 16 pixels.
CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR Å°Å°Å°
64
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR
4.12 Setting Grid Color - Setting grid color
Figure 2-2-7 Grid Color Setting Window
The colors of the main grid and sub-grid can be changed.
1. Select “grid color setting”. The grid color setting dialogue box (see Figure 2-2-7)
is displayed.
2. Click “main grid change” or “sub-grid change” by the left button. The color
setting dialogue box is displayed.
3. Click the desired color and the “OK” button in the color setting window by the left
button.
4. Click the “OK” button in the grid color setting dialogue box by the left button.
4.13 Setting Coordinates for TIM Bank
- Setting coordinates for TIM bank
Figure 2-2-8 TIM Bank Coordinate Setting Dialogue Box
65
1. Select “TIM bank coordinate setting”. The TIM bank coordinate setting dialogue
box (see Figure 2-2-8) is displayed.
2. Enter the desired value.
3. Click the “OK” button by the left button.
X and Y coordinates of an image: Coordinates where the image is located on the
VRAM
X and Y coordinates of a palette: Coordinates where the palette is located on the
VRAM
Color set: Number of color sets used (1 to 16)
Remarks
• Coordinates to be specified are coordinates of the top left edge point of the area to be
used.
• For an image, a VRAM area of 64 ´ 256 words is used for one bank in the 16-color
mode. In the 256-color mode, an area of 128 ´ 256 words is used.
• In the 16-color mode, one color set is composed of 16 16-color palettes. In the 256-
color mode, one color set is composed of one 256-color palette.
• In the 16-color mode, an area of 16 ´ 16 words is used for one color set. In the 256-
color mode, an area of 256 ´ 1 words is used.
• For more than one color set, the area is used as shown in Figure 2-2-9.
Figure 2-2-9 VRAM Area Used for Color Set
CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR Å°Å°Å°
66
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR
• Up to 16 color sets (including palettes in a TIM file) can be specified
• Any coordinates in the display area cannot be specified.
• A duplicate area cannot be specified.
• As coordinates of an image, only the top left edge point of the VRAM texture page
can be specified. (The x coordinate is a multiple of 64, while the y coordinate is 0 or
256.)
• As the x coordinate of a palette, only a multiple of 16 can be specified. In the 16-
color mode, only a multiple of 16 can be specified as the Y coordinate as well.
• In the PlayStation unit, the image used as a sprite, texture or BG is handled in units of
256 ´ 256 pixels. In the sprite editor as well, the image is handled in units of texture
pages each of which is composed of 256 ´ 256 pixels. In the sprite editor, a palette
covers 256 colors. (In the 16-color mode, 16 palettes are supported.) In the 16-color
mode, an area of 16 ´ 16 words is used as one color set. In the 256-color mode, an
area of 256 ´ 1 words is used as one color set. Cell and animation data involves
image or palette coordinates on the PlayStation VRAM. Coordinates to be used must
be preset. Under the constraint of a texture page for the PlayStation unit, image
coordinates can be set only in intervals of 64 words in the X axis direction and of 256
lines in the Y axis direction. Further, palette coordinates can be set only in intervals
of 16 words in the X axis direction and of 16 lines in the Y axis direction in the 16-
color mode. For more than one color set, an area of 16 x N is used in the X axis
direction, where N is the number of color sets, and an area of 16 is used in the Y axis
direction. In the 256-color mode, an area of 256 is used in the X axis direction and an
area of N in the Y axis direction. For an image and palette, and for display, a
duplicate area cannot be used.
• In the TIM bank coordinate setting dialogue box, only a TIM bank image can use two
or more color sets as a sprite for a cell and animation. Selecting one color in the
desired color set as the current rendering color and, then, cataloging a cell or sprite
cause the cell or sprite to look into the color set.
Short Cut: [Ctrl+T]
67
5
Display Menu
5.1 Power - Setting power for displaying paint window
Figure 2-2-10 Display Power Setting Dialogue Box
The rectangular area on the whole TIM display window is displayed as the
extended paint window. The power of extension can be set at 2 to 20.
1. Select “power”. The display power setting dialogue box (see Figure 2-2-10) is
displayed.
2. Specify the desired power, and click the “OK” button by the left mouse button.
Remarks
• Turning on “whole TIM display x 2” double extends the whole TIM display window.
Short Cut: “Power changing tool” (Ctrl+R) on the tool bar
CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR Å°Å°Å°
68
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR
5.2 Bank - Selecting bank
Figure 2-2-11 Bank Setting Dialogue Box
69
The sprite editor can concurrently invoke up to four TIM files and four BGD files
for operation. When invoking two or more files, select an appropriate bank for the
files.
1. Select “bank”. The bank setting dialogue box (see Figure 2-2-11) is displayed.
2. Turn on the button for the desired bank, and click the “OK” button by the left
mouse button.
TIM BANK TIM file bank selection
0 Selects bank 0.
1 Selects bank 1.
2 Selects bank 2.
3 Selects bank 3.
MAP BANK BGD file bank selection
0 Selects bank 0.
1 Selects bank 1.
2 Selects bank 2.
3 Selects bank 3.
Transfer MAP BANK Setting of contents displayed on video monitor
0 Displays the BGD file for bank 0.
1 Displays the BGD file for bank 1.
2 Displays the BGD file for bank 2.
3 Displays the BGD file for bank 3.
Remarks
• Selecting “map” in setting menu “items transferred to artist board” allows the display
on the video monitor of the contents of the bank where “transfer MAP BANK” is
turned on. Turning on two or more banks leads to the superposed display of contents
stored in the banks. For example, turning on banks 0 and 1 displays the contents of
the BGD file for bank 0 superposed on the BGD file for bank 1. (The BGD file for
the bank with a smaller bank number is displayed nearer yourself.)
CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR Å°Å°Å°
70
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR
• The requirement for invoking two or more files after bank selection is that they must
be assigned the same number of colors set.
Short Cut: “Bank selection tool” (Ctrl+B) on the tool bar
71
5.3 Grid - Displaying grid or no grid
1. Select “grid”.
2. The grid is displayed. With the grid displayed, the display is suppressed.
Short Cut: “Grid tool” (Ctrl+G) on the tool bar
5.4 Reloading - Re-rendering with video monitor out of order
1. Select “reload”.
Short Cut: [Ctrl+P]
6
Window Menu
6.1 Arranging Icons - Arranging iconic windows
1. Select “arranging icons”.
6.2 Whole TIM Display - Activating whole TIM display window
1. Select “whole TIM display”.
2. With the window made to be iconic, it is opened and activated.
CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR Å°Å°Å°
72
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. MENU BAR
CHAPTER 3
TOOL BAR
This chapter explains the functions of the
buttons on the tool bar.
Å°Å° CHAPTER 3. TOOL BAR
Figure 2-3-1 Tool Bar
Clicking the desired tool by the left mouse button provides the same effect as the
menu item selected.
1
Opening Tool – Loading saved file
1. Click “opening tool” by the left button.
2. Select the directory where the file is saved, and a file name.
3. Click the “OK” button by the left mouse button.
Related command: “Opening file” in the file menu
74
Opening tool
Saving tool
Grid tool
Power modification tool
Redoing tool
Fixing tool
Undoing tool
Attribute setting tool
Bank selection tool
Downward scroll tool
Right scroll tool
Sprite button
Map button
Animation button
Non-button
Screen display tool
CHAPTER 3. TOOL BAR Å°Å°
2
Saving Tool – Saving current contents of opened file
1. Click “saving tool” by the left mouse button.
2. Specify the directory where the file is to be saved, and enter a file name.
3. Click the “OK” button by the left mouse button.
Related command: “Saving under name” in the file menu
3
Grid Tool – Displaying grid or no grid
1. Click “grid tool” by the left mouse button.
2. The grid is displayed. The displayed grid is hidden.
Related command: “Grid” in the display menu
75
76
Å°Å° CHAPTER 3. TOOL BAR
4
The extended rectangular area on the whole TIM display window is displayed. The
power of extension can be set at 3 to 20. Turning on the “whole TIM display x 2” doubles
the whole TIM display window.
1. Click “power modification tool” by the left mouse button. The display power
setting window is displayed.
2. Specify the desired power, and click the “OK” button by the left mouse button.
Related command: “Power” in the display menu
5
Bank selection tool – Selecting bank
1. Click “bank selection tool” by the left mouse button. The bank setting window is
displayed.
2. Turn on the button for the desired bank, and click the “OK” button by the left
mouse button. The bank is selected.
Related command: “Bank” in the display menu
Power Modification Tool
– Setting power of displaying paint window
77
6
• Setting attribute
1. Select “attribute tool” on the tool palette.
2. Select “map attribute”. The attribute and semitransparency setting window is
displayed.
3. Turn on the attribute setting button.
4. Turn on “attribute supported” for the desired data. Setting an attribute value
beyond 255 requires that “16-bit attribute” be turned on. When entering or
displaying a decimal attribute value, press the decimal number button. For a
hexadecimal number, press the hexadecimal number button.
5. Enter an attribute value.
6. Click the cell where the attribute is to be set, by the left mouse button, or drag the
setting are by the left button.
7. For termination, click the close button by the left mouse button.
• Setting semitransparency information
1. Select “attribute tool” on the tool palette.
2. Select “map attribute”. The attribute and semitransparency setting window is
displayed.
3. Turn on the semitransparency setting button.
4. Specify the desired semitransparency rate.
5. Click the cell to be made semitransparent on the cell display window by the left
mouse button, or drag the appropriate area by the left button.
6. For termination, click the close button by the left mouse button.
CHAPTER 3. TOOL BAR Å°Å°
Attribute Setting Tool – Setting attribute
and semitransparency information in cell
78
Å°Å° CHAPTER 3. TOOL BAR
7
Undoing Tool – Canceling last tool operation
1. Click “undoing tool” by the left mouse button.
Remarks
• The status immediately preceding the first operation by the tool on the currently
selected tool palette is set up.
• Only one state is saved in the undo buffer. The status immediately preceding the first
operation during new tool selection on the tool palette is saved.
Related command: “Undo” in the editing menu
8
Fixing Tool – Setting up status after next undoing
1. Click “fixing tool” by the left mouse button. The contents of the undo buffer are
updated.
Remarks
• The default is such that the sprite editor saves the status immediately preceding the
first operation after tool selection on the tool palette into the undo buffer. Thus,
executing undo after tool selection and operation sets up status during the tool
selection. Pressing the FIX button on the tool bar causes the current status to be
saved in the undo buffer. Use the FIX button if needed.
Related command: “Fix” in the editing menu
79
9
Redoing Tool – Setting up status before undoing
1. Immediately after having executed “undo”, click “redoing tool” by the left mouse
button.
2. The status before executing “undo” is set up.
Related command: “Redo” in the editing menu
1 0
• Sprite button
Displays the contents of the whole TIM display window on the video monitor.
Related command: “Sprite” for “items transferred to artist board” in the setting
menu
• Map button
Displays the contents of the map display window on the video monitor.
Related command: “Map” for “items transferred to artist board” in the setting
menu
• Animation button
Displays an animation on the video monitor.
Related command: “Animation” for “items transferred to artist board” in the
setting menu
CHAPTER 3. TOOL BAR Å°Å°
Screen Display Tool
– Setting contents to be displayed on video monitor
• Non-button
Displays none on the video monitor.
Related command: “None” for “items transferred to artist board” in the setting
menu
11
Related command: “Sprite display X offset” in the setting menu
1 2
Related command: “Sprite display Y offset” in the setting menu
80
Å°Å° CHAPTER 3. TOOL BAR
Right Scroll Tool – Moving image displayed
on video monitor to left
Downward Scroll Tool – Upward moving
image displayed on video monitor
CHAPTER 4
TOOL PALETTE
This chapter explains the functions supported
by the buttons on the tool palette.
Å°Å° CHAPTER 4. TOOL PALETTE
The tool palette is composed of a line-up of 19 buttons as shown below. One of them is
always selected. Some tool functions are changed and invalidated depending on the type of a
window subjected to operation.
Figure 2-4-1 Tool Palette
1 Pen tool – Drawing curves
Whole TIM display window
Specify the area in the paint window for extended display by clicking the mouse
left button.
Paint window
Specify the pen size with the rendering color by clicking the left mouse button.
Dragging by the left mouse button leads to the drawing of a curve in the rendering
color according to mouse movement. Dragging with the Caps Lock button on the
keyboard turned on allows a dashed line to be drawn.
Clicking the right mouse button leads to the adoption of the pixel color pointed to
by the mouse cursor.
82
Pen tool
Eraser tool
Straight line drawing tool
Color change tool
Rectangle drawing tool
Vertical inversion tool
Mask copy tool
Copying tool
Moving tool
Coloring tool
Animation tool
Attribute tool
Cell tool
Total clearing tool
Horizontal inversion tool
Size modification tool
Rotation tool
Scroll tool
Ellipse drawing tool
CHAPTER 4. TOOL PALETTE Å°Å°Å°
Cell display window
Clicking the left mouse button allows the selection of cells to be located on a map.
Dragging by the left mouse button allows the selection of the area of cells to be
located on a map.
Map display window
Clicking the left mouse button allows the selected cells to be mapped.
Remarks
• Clicking the right button on the palette display window with a cell selected there
causes the cell to look into the palette clicked by the right mouse button.
2
Eraser Tool – Erasing image
Paint window
Clicking the left mouse button allows the pen size to be dotted in the background
color.
Dragging by the left mouse button allows a curve to be drawn in the background
color according to mouse movement.
83
84
Å°Å° CHAPTER 4. TOOL PALETTE
3
Paint window
Dragging by the left mouse button allows a straight line to be drawn in the
rendering color between the start and end points of the dragging.
4
Color Change Tool – Changing colors
Paint window
1. Replacing rendering color (A) in the specified area with rendering color (B)
(a) Specify the area whose color is to be changed by left dragging. The default is
that rendering color (A) of the whole image in the current TIM bank is
changed. Clicking the right mouse button in the paint window after area
specification enables the specification to be canceled.
(b) Click the right mouse button on the palette display window to specify
rendering color (A) to be changed.
(c) Click the left mouse button on the palette display window to specify new
rendering color (B).
2. Replacing rendering color (A) with rendering color (B)
(a) Specify rendering color (A) to be replaced. The following two methods can be
used to specify a color.
• Click the desired color by the left mouse button on the palette display
window.
• Click the desired pixel on the paint window by the right mouse button.
(b) With the shift (or Ctrl) key pressed, specify new rendering color (B).
Specifying (B) with the shift key pressed causes the palette index in the TIM
image as well to be swapped. Only a row of palettes on the palette display
window is changed, with the image on the paint window not modified. If (B)
has been specified with the Ctrl key pressed, the palette index in the TIM
image is not swapped. Thus, a row of palettes on the palette display window is
changed, as well as image appearance on the paint window is modified.
Straight Line Drawing Tool
– Drawing straight lines
85
Remarks
• Only two colors in the same palette can be replaced with each other.
3. Replacing 16-color palette (A) with (B).
(a) Specify one color in palette (A) to be replaced.
(b) With the shift and Ctrl key pressed, specify one color in palette (B) to be
substituted.
Cell display window
Changing the order of cell data
1. Click cell (A) to be changed by the left mouse button.
2. Click cell (B) to be changed by the left mouse button.
Remarks
• In the corresponding map data as well, cell information is changed, with the
appearance of the map data not modified.
5
Paint window
Dragging by the left mouse button allows the drawing of the rectangle where the
start and end points of the dragging are the end points of the diagonal, with its inner
area painted by the rendering color.
CHAPTER 4. TOOL PALETTE Å°Å°Å°
Rectangle Drawing Tool
– Drawing rectangle with rendering color
86
Å°Å° CHAPTER 4. TOOL PALETTE
6
Paint window
Clicking the pixel to be painted by the left mouse button changes the same color
pixel adjacent to it to the rendering color.
Remarks
• The pixel, out of the area defined by lines, having the same color as the specified
pixel is also painted.
7
Moving Tool – Moving images
Paint window
1. Specify an area to be moved by left dragging.
2. With the rectangular frame located at the position to which the image is to be
moved, click the left mouse button.
Whole TIM display window
1. Specify an area to be moved by left dragging.
2. With the rectangular frame located at the position to which the image is to be
moved, click the left mouse button.
Remarks
• Area specification can be canceled by clicking the right button. But the contents of
the area are not reset.
Coloring Tool – Coloring area defined
by lines with rendering color
87
8
Copying Tool – Copying images
Paint window
1. Specify an area to be copied by left dragging.
2. With the rectangular frame located at the position to which the image is to be
moved, click the left mouse button.
Whole TIM display window
1. Specify an area to be copied by left dragging.
2. With the rectangular frame located at the position to which the image is to be
moved, click the left mouse button.
Palette display window
1. Specify an area to be copied by left dragging.
2. With the rectangular frame located at the position to which the image is to be
moved, click the left mouse button.
Cell display window
1. Click the left mouse button to select a cell to be copied, or specify an area to be
copied by left dragging.
2. Click the left mouse button at the position to which the image is to be copied.
Map display window
1. Click the left mouse button to select a cell to be copied, or specify an area to be
copied by left dragging.
2. Click the left mouse button at the position to which the image is to be copied.
Remarks
• Area specification can be canceled by clicking the right mouse button.
CHAPTER 4. TOOL PALETTE Å°Å°
88
Å°Å° CHAPTER 4. TOOL PALETTE
9
Mask Copy Tool – Mask-copying images
Paint window
1. Specify a color to be masked.
2. Specify an area to be mask-copied by left dragging.
3. With the shift key pressed, locate the rectangular frame at the position where the
image is to be mask-copied and click the left mouse button. Clicking the left
mouse button without pressing the shift key causes the background color for
palette number 0 to be masked.
Remarks
• Area specification can be canceled by clicking the right mouse button.
1 0
Paint window
Dragging by the left mouse button allows the specification of an area to be inverted
vertically.
Cell display window
Clicking the left mouse button enables the specification of a cell to be inverted
vertically.
Dragging by the left mouse button enables the specification of an area to be
inverted vertically.
Vertical Inversion Tool
– Vertical image inversion
89
11
Paint window
Dragging by the left mouse button allows the specification of an area to be inverted
horizontally.
Cell display window
Clicking the left mouse button enables the specification of a cell to be inverted
horizontally.
Dragging by the left mouse button enables the specification of an area to be
inverted horizontally.
1 2
Paint window
1. Specify an area to be extended/reduced by dragging by the left mouse button.
2. Locate the cursor at the position where the image is to be copied, and set the
desired size by dragging by the left mouse button.
Remarks
• Area specification can be canceled by clicking the right mouse button.
CHAPTER 4. TOOL PALETTE Å°Å°Å°
Horizontal Inversion Tool
– Horizontal image inversion
Size Modification Tool
– Extending/reducing and copying image
90
Å°Å° CHAPTER 4. TOOL PALETTE
1 3 Rotation Tool – Rotating image
Paint window
1. Specify an area to be rotated by dragging by the left mouse button.
2. Use the arrow button on the scroll bar to rotate the rectangular frame.
Upper direction arrow or right arrow: Rotates the rectangular frame CCW.
Lower direction arrow or left arrow: Rotates the rectangular frame CW.
3. Click any position in the paint window by the left mouse button.
Remarks
• The rotated image within the rectangular frame before the rotation is rendered. The
image out of the rectangular frame is not rendered.
• Area specification can be canceled by clicking the right mouse button.
14
Scroll Tool – Making image scroll
Paint window
1. Specify an area to be made to scroll by dragging by the left mouse button.
2. Use the arrow button on the scroll bar to make the image scroll to the desired
position.
Left arrow: Makes the image scroll to the left in the area.
Right arrow: Makes the image scroll to the right in the area.
Upper direction arrow: Makes the image scroll upward in the area.
Lower direction arrow: Makes the image scroll downward in the area.
91
Remarks
• Area specification can be canceled by clicking the right mouse button.
• The scrolling image out of the rectangular frame is displayed from the opposite side.
• With the Caps Lock key on the keyboard pressed, the scrolling image out of the
rectangular frame is not displayed from the opposite side.
1 5
Paint window
Drag the center of an ellipse or circle toward the outside by the left mouse button.
Remarks
• The flatness rate of an ellipse is displayed at the center of the status bar.
CHAPTER 4. TOOL PALETTE Å°Å°Å°
Ellipse Drawing Tool
– Drawing ellipses and circles
92
Å°Å° CHAPTER 4. TOOL PALETTE
1 6 Total Clearing Tool – Initializing data
Paint window
Clicking the left mouse button enables window contents to be initialized.
Whole TIM display window
Clicking the left mouse button enables window contents to be initialized.
Palette display window
Clicking the left mouse button enables window contents to be initialized.
Cell display window
Clicking the left mouse button enables window contents to be initialized.
Map display window
Clicking the left mouse button enables window contents to be initialized.
Animation display window
Clicking the left mouse button enables window contents to be initialized.
1 7 Cell Tool – Cutting out cell data
Whole TIM display window
Dragging by the left mouse button allows the selection of a cell area to be cut out
of an image.
93
Cell display window
Clicking the left mouse button allows the selected image to be cataloged as a cell.
Clicking the right mouse button allows the indication of the area corresponding to
the specified cell on the whole TIM display window. The following information is
displayed at the center of the status bar.
PALETTE: Palette number
TIMBANK: Bank number (x and y coordinates)
Map display window
Clicking the right mouse button allows the indication of the cell corresponding to
the specified cell on the cell display window, and of the area corresponding to the cell
on the whole TIM display window. The following information is displayed at the
center of the status bar.
CellNo.: Cell number
(x and y coordinates (X, Y) on the cell display window)
1 8 Attribute Tool – Setting attributes
Cell display window
Clicking the left mouse button allows the setting in the specified cell of the value
specified by the attribute and semitransparency setting dialogue box.
Dragging by the left mouse button allows the setting in the specified area of the
value specified by the attribute and semitransparency setting dialogue box.
CHAPTER 4. TOOL PALETTE Å°Å°Å°
94
Å°Å° CHAPTER 4. TOOL PALETTE
Map display window
Clicking the left mouse button allows the setting in the specified cell of the value
specified by the attribute and semitransparency setting dialogue box.
Dragging by the left mouse button allows the setting in the specified area of the
value specified by the attribute and semitransparency setting dialogue box.
1 9 Animation Tool – Cutting out animation data
Whole TIM display window
Dragging by the left mouse button allows the specification of an area of an image
cataloged as animation data.
Palette display window
Clicking the right mouse button causes the sprite selected on the animation display
window to look into the specified palette.
Animation display window
Clicking the left mouse button allows the specified area to be cataloged as
animation data.
Clicking the right mouse button allows the indication of the area corresponding to
the specified sprite on the whole TIM display window.
CHAPTER 5
WINDOW
This chapter explains details of the windows as components of the sprite editor
screen.
Å°Å° CHAPTER 5. WINDOW
1
Whole TIM Display Window
Figure 2-5-1 Whole TOM DisplaY Window
The whole image for one bank is displayed. The extended rectangular area in the
window is displayed in the paint window. Clicking the left mouse button enables the
rectangular area to be moved to the desired position. The rectangular area can be double
extended and displayed by selecting “power” in the display menu, opening the display power
setting dialogue box, and turning of the “whole TIM display x 2” button. Selecting “cell
tool” or “animation tool” on the tool palette allows the grid to be displayed in intervals of
eight pixels, with images cut out along the grid.
96
CHAPTER 5. WINDOW Å°Å°
2
Cell Display Window
Figure 2-5-2 Cell Display Window
The cell cut out of an image in the whole TIM display window is displayed. If the
window has been opened first or if “total clearing tool” on the tool palette has been used, the
top left cell data in the TIM file for TIM bank 0 is initialized. Selecting “reduced cell
display” in the “setting” menu causes cell data to be reduced and displayed in the cell display
window. With the mouse cursor located on the cell display window, coordinates are
displayed on the status bar. Clicking the right mouse button causes the following
information on the cell to be displayed on the status bar.
PALETTE: Palette number
TIMBANK: TIM bank number (x and y coordinates)
Clicking the cell by the right mouse button with the cell tool on the tool palette selected
allows the indication of the area corresponding to the cell on the whole TIM display window.
With the window activated, the following short cut keys can be used.
[­][¯][¬][®]: Makes the cell display window scroll.
97
3
Map Display Window
Figure 2-5-3 Map Display Window
The map where cells are located is displayed. If the window has been opened first or if
“total clearing tool” on the tool palette has been used, the cell for cell data of number 0 is
initialized. Selecting “reduced map display” in the “setting” menu causes map data to be
reduced and displayed in the map display window. With the cursor located on the map
display window, coordinates are displayed on the status bar. Clicking the right mouse button
displays the following information on the cell on the status bar.
CellNo.: Cell number (x and y coordinates (X, Y) on the cell display window)
Clicking the right mouse button at a cell with the cell tool on the tool palette selected
displays the area corresponding to the cell on the whole TIM display window, and the
corresponding cell on the cell display window.
With the window activated, the following short cut keys can be used.
[­][¯][¬][®]: Makes the map display window scroll.
98
Å°Å° CHAPTER 5. WINDOW
99
4
Palette Display Window
Figure 2-5-4 Palette Display Window
Color palettes are edited. In the 256-color mode, one palette is displayed in the whole
window. In the 16-color mode, one row displays one palette, with the whole window
displaying 16 palettes.
• Red, green and blue bars
These bars can change the red, green and blue components of the rendering color
currently selected.
• Foreground color display area
Displays the currently selected rendering color.
• Semitransparency button
Turning on this button makes the current rendering color semitransparent.
CHAPTER 5. WINDOW Å°Å°Å°
Foreground color
display area
Semitransparent area
button
Semitransparency button
100
Å°Å° CHAPTER 5. WINDOW
• Semitransparent area button
With this button turned on, semitransparency information on palettes in the area
selected on the palette display window is made to be the same as current information
provided by the semitransparency button.
• Gradation button
With this button turned on, gradation is created between the selected color and the
current rendering color.
Remarks
The bottom color on the palette display window and the right-edge four colors on
the second bottom row cannot be used. For data which uses those colors, correct color
information cannot be displayed on the Windows screen.
• Position of background color
256-color mode: The top left color on the palette is adopted as the background color.
16-color mode: The leftmost color on the palette is adopted as the background color.
• Semitransparent and transparent colors
The semitransparency button on the palette display window turned on and off
corresponds to STP bit values of the TIM data CLUT entry of 1 and 0, respectively.
Semitransparency: off, all RGB: 00 ® Transparent
Semitransparency; off, any of RGB: other than 00 ® Opaque
Semitransparency: on ® Semitransparent
• If the current rendering color and the selected color are not located at the same line or
row on the palette display window, no gradation is created.
101
5
Animation Display Window
Figure 2-5-5 Animation Display Window
Sprite groups are cataloged and edited. When editing the cataloged sprite, select
and specify a value on the sprite group display window. With the shift or Ctrl key
pressed, more than one sprite can be selected. Up to 3072 sprites and up to 256 sprite
groups can be created. With the window activated, the following short cut keys can be
used.
[8][2][4][6]: Makes the animation display window scroll. (This is applicable only
to the numeric keys with NumLock set.)
• Sprite display window
The sprite cut out of an image is located.
• Sprite group display window
Numeric values on the located sprite are displayed. The following are the contents
of numeric values displayed:
CHAPTER 5. WINDOW Å°Å°
Sprite group display window
Sprite display window
102
Å°Å° CHAPTER 5. WINDOW
SprGpNo (X, Y) W / H <BankNo:PaleteNo>
SprGpNo: Sprite group number
X, Y: Sprite coordinates (The top left edge on the sprite display window is
(0, 0).)
W, H: Width and height of sprite
BankNo: TIM bank where the sprite has been cut out
PaletteNo: Sprite palette number
• Cut button
Erases the selected sprite to be stored in the buffer.
• Copy button
Copies the selected sprite into the buffer.
• Paste button
Moves the sprite stored in the buffer to the current cursor position.
• Head button
Creates a new sprite group. Select the desired sprite and click the “Head” button
by the left mouse button. The sprites following the clicked position are created as a
new group.
• Rotation angle
Rotates the selected sprite CW. With the scroll bar pointed to, set the desired
angle.
• X Zoom
Extends/reduces the selected sprite in the X axis direction. With the scroll bar
pointed to, set the desired power.
103
• Y Zoom
Extends/reduces the selected sprite in the Y axis direction. With the scroll bar
pointed to, set the desired power.
• X size
Sets the number of pixels in the selected sprite along the X axis. With the scroll
bar pointed to, set the desired size.
• Y size
Sets the number of pixels in the selected sprite along the Y axis. With the scroll
bar pointed to, set the desired size.
• Cross cursor button
Moves the selected sprite by pixel vertically and horizontally.
• x8 button
Moves the cross cursor button in units of eight pixels.
• H Flip button
Horizontally inverts the selected sprite.
• V Flip button
Vertically inverts the selected sprite.
• Box button
Displays the selected sprite frame.
CHAPTER 5. WINDOW Å°Å°
104
Å°Å° CHAPTER 5. WINDOW
• Semitransparency button
Semitransparently displays the selected sprite (except for on Windows).
• Frame button
Displays no image and only the frame of the selected sprite. With only the frame
displayed, the processing speed is enhanced compared with the display of an image.
• Align button
Locates sprites cataloged on the sprite display window along the grid (in intervals
of eight pixels).
• F/2+B/2 button
Sets the semitransparency rates of a sprite and BG at 0.50xF+0.50xB (where F is
the brightness of the sprite and B is the brightness of BG). Only with the
semitransparency button turned on, this button can be selected.
• F+B button
Sets the semitransparency rates of a sprite and BG at 1.00xF+1.00xB. Only with
the semitransparency button turned on, this button can be selected.
• -F+B button
Sets the semitransparency rates of a sprite and BG at -1.00xF+1.00xB. Only with
the semitransparency button turned on, this button can be selected.
105
• F/4+B button
Sets the semitransparency rates of a sprite and BG at 0.25xF+1.00xB. Only with
the semitransparency button turned on, this button can be selected.
6
Time Table Display Window
Figure 2-5-6 Time Table Display Window
CHAPTER 5. WINDOW Å°Å°Å°
106
Å°Å° CHAPTER 5. WINDOW
A time table for animations is edited. When editing the cataloged time table, select and
specify a numeric value. With the shift or Ctrl key pressed, more than one numeric value
can be selected. With the window activated, the following short cut keys are available.
[8][2][4][6]: Makes the animation display window scroll. (This applies only to the
numeric keys with NumLock set.)
• The following are the contents of numeric values displayed in the
window:
SprGpNo Time (OffsetX, OffsetY)
SprGpNo: Sprite group number
Time: Display time
OffsetX, OffsetY: Amount of the movement of the origin (top left edge point) for
the animation sprite display window from the origin on the
display area
• Ins button
Catalogs a new sprite group into the cursor line.
• Cut button
Erases the selected sprite group to be stored into the buffer.
• Copy button
Copies the selected sprite group into the buffer.
• Paste button
Copies the sprite group stored in the buffer.
• Undo button
Cancels time table modification by the “Cut” or “Paste” button.
107
• Mouse button
Moves a sprite along according to mouse movement to display animations.
• Start button
Starts animation operation. Clicking the right mouse button terminates animation
operation.
• BG Color button
Figure 2-5-7 Color Setting Dialogue Box
Opens the color setting dialogue box (see Figure 2-5-7) to set the BG color of the
video monitor.
• Group
Sets a sprite group number.
CHAPTER 5. WINDOW Å°Å°
108
Å°Å° CHAPTER 5. WINDOW
• Time
Sets the time for displaying a sprite group in units of 1/60 seconds.
• Attribute
Allows an attribute value to be set at that timing. The attribute value ranges from 0
to 15.
• Cross cursor button
Moves the coordinate axes for the selected sprite group by pixel.
• x8 button
Moves the cross cursor button in units of eight pixels.
109
7
Paint Window
Figure 2-5-9 Paint Window
A tool on the tool palette is used to edit images. The sub-grid (power of five or more) is
displayed by pixel, and the main grid is displayed by eight pixels. With the window
activated, the following short cut keys are available.
[­][¯][¬][®]: Makes the paint window scroll.
[1][2][3]: Sets the pen size of the rendering tool at 1, 2 and 3 pixels. (This is
applicable only to numeric keys with NumLock set.)
CHAPTER 5. WINDOW Å°Å°Å°
110
Å°Å° CHAPTER 5. WINDOW
8
Window Selection
The following short cut keys are supported for active window selection.
[F5]: Sets four iconic windows for paint display window opening, cell display,
map display, animation display and time table display. (Paint mode)
[F6]: Sets three iconic windows for cell display, map display window opening,
paint, animation display and time table display. (Map mode)
[F7]: Sets three iconic windows for animation display, time table display
window opening, paint, cell display and map display. (Animation mode)
[Shift+F1]: Activates the whole TIM display window.
[Shift+F2]: Activates the paint window.
[Shift+F3]: Activates the cell display window.
[Shift+F4]: Activates the map display window.
[Shift+F5]: Activates the palette display window.
[Shift+F6]: Activates the animation display window.
[Shift+F7]: Activates the time table display window.
CHAPTER 6
MISCELLANEOUS
This chapter explains notes on operation
and short cut by the keyboard.
Å°Å° CHAPTER 6. MISCELLANEOUS
1
List of Short Cut Keys
[F1]: Sets the TIM bank at address 0.
[F2]: Sets the TIM bank at address 1.
[F3]: Sets the TIM bank at address 2.
[F4]: Sets the TIM bank at address 3.
[F5]: Sets four iconic windows for paint display window opening, cell display,
map display, animation display and time table display.
[F6]: Sets three iconic windows for cell display, map display window opening,
paint, animation display and time table display.
[F7]: Sets three iconic windows for animation display, time table display
window opening, paint, cell display and map display.
[F8]: Selects the display power for whole TIM display window.
[F9]: Increases the display power for the paint window.
[Shift+F1]: Activates the whole TIM display window.
[Shift+F2]: Activates the paint window.
[Shift+F3]: Activates the cell display window.
[Shift+F4]: Activates the map display window.
[Shift+F5]: Activates the palette display window.
[Shift+F6]: Activates the animation display window.
[Shift+F7]: Activates the time table display window.
[Shift+F9]: Lowers the display power for the paint window.
[PageUp]: Increases the color set number
[PageDown]: Lowers the color set number.
[Ctrl+1]: Sets the snap at 1 x 1.
[Ctrl+2]: Sets the snap at 4 x 4.
[Ctrl+3]: Sets the snap at 8 x 8.
[Ctrl+4]: Sets the snap at 16 x 16.
[Ctrl+A]: Redo
[Ctrl+B]: Opens the “bank setting” dialogue box.
[Ctrl+C]: Opens the “attribute setting” dialogue box.
[Ctrl+E]: Selects the display power for the cell display window.
[Ctrl+F]: Fix
[Ctrl+G]: Selects grid display or grid display suppression.
[Ctrl+I]: Opens the “grid color setting” dialogue box.
[Ctrl+J]: Displays the contents of the whole TIM display window on the video
monitor.
[Ctrl+K]: Displays the contents of the map display window on the video monitor.
[Ctrl+L]: Displays an animation on the video monitor.
[Ctrl+M]: Opens the “map cell size setting” window.
[Ctrl+N]: Displays none on the video monitor.
[Ctrl+O]: Opens the “file opening” dialogue box.
[Ctrl+P]: Re-renders the video monitor.
112
CHAPTER 6. MISCELLANEOUS Å°Å°Å°
[Ctrl+R]: Opens the display power dialogue box.
[Ctrl+S]: Opens the “saving under name” dialogue box.
[Ctrl+T]: Opens the “TIM bank coordinate setting” dialogue box.
[Ctrl+U]: Moves the image displayed on the video monitor to the left.
[Ctrl+W]: Selects the display power for the map display window.
[Ctrl+Y]: Downward moves the image displayed on the video monitor.
[Ctrl+Z]: Undo
[Alt+O]: Opens the “file opening” dialogue box for opening SDF.
[Alt+S]: Opens the “saving under name” dialogue box for saving SDF.
[Alt+X]: Terminates the sprite editor.
[1]*: • Sets the pen size at one pixel only when the paint window is active.
[2]*: • Sets the pen size at two pixels only when the paint window is active.
• Functions as the lower direction arrow cross cursor key, only when
the animation and time table display windows are active.
[3]*: • Sets the pen size at three pixels only when the paint window is active.
[4]*: • Functions as the left arrow cross cursor key, only when the animation
and time table display windows are active.
[6]*: • Functions as the right arrow cross cursor key, only when the
animation and time table display windows are active.
[8]*: • Functions as the upper direction arrow cross cursor key, only when
the animation and time table display windows are active.
[¬]: • Makes the active paint, cell display or map display window scroll.
[¯]: • Makes the active paint, cell display or map display window scroll.
[­]: • Makes the active paint, cell display or map display window scroll.
[®]: • Makes the active paint, cell display or map display window scroll.
Note: The key with an asterisk is a numeric key with NumLock set.
113
2
Notes
Palettes for cell and animation
In the TIM bank coordinate setting dialogue, some TIM bank images can use two
or more color sets as sprites for cells and animations. Selecting one color in the
desired color set as the current rendering color in the palette display window before
cataloging a cell and sprite causes the cell and sprite to look into the color set. The
cataloged color set to be looked into can be changed as follows:
• Cell
After having selected an area to be changed by the pen tool on the cell window by
dragging, click one color in the desired color set on the palette display window by the
right mouse button.
• Animation
After having selected a sprite to be changed by the animation tool from a list of
sprite groups, click one color in the desired color set on the palette display window by
the right mouse button.
Display color
The Windows system reserves 20 colors (for displaying the window frame, etc.).
Thus, only 236 colors can be displayed at a time. In the 256-color mode as well, the
last 20 colors on the palette cannot be displayed correctly. Because one window can
use only one palette, cells and sprites cut out of two or more TIM bank images during
cell, map or animation display look into the currently active palette. Whether colors
are correct can be checked on the TV display. In the 16-color mode, display on the
paint window looks into the currently active 16-color palette.
114
Å°Å° CHAPTER 6. MISCELLANEOUS
115
Semitransparency display
The PlayStation unit incurs the following restrictions on semitransparency display.
Table 2-5-1 Relationships between Semitransparency Display and STP Bit
The STP bit is set by turning on and off the semitransparency button on the palette
display window. The sprite semitransparency attribute is set at off by selecting the
“not supported” button in the attribute and semitransparency setting dialogue box, and
at on by selecting any of the other buttons. Animation data is set by turning on and off
the semitransparency button in the animation display window.
Use of image data
When polygon rendering is used instead of sprite rendering, the PlayStation unit
incurs the following restrictions. During polygon rendering, the line below and to the
right of the specified polygon is not drawn. For example, displaying a texture of 16 x
16 requires that a texture of 17 x 17 be pasted on a polygon of 17 x 17. For the texture
including the line below or to the right of the texture page, however, the texture larger
by one line cannot be specified. This means that a texture of 16 x 16 is pasted onto a
polygon of 17 x 17. Thus, the polygon extended by pixel is rendered. For rendering
involving reliability of one pixel, therefore, the texture including the right edge and the
bottom cannot be used. Further, rotation incurs the same restrictions for the texture
including the top and the left edge.
CHAPTER 6. MISCELLANEOUS Å°Å°
116
Å°Å° CHAPTER 6. MISCELLANEOUS
APPENDIX A
CHAPTER 1
INSTALLATION
1 Installation
Install the sprite editor in the hard disk of a personal computer. The sprite editor program
and sample data for the tutorial are stored in the (attached) sprite editor setup disk.
1. Insert the setup disk into a disk drive (drive A in the following example).
2. Start up Windows.
3. Select “specification of file name and execution” in the icon menu for the program
manager.
4. Enter A:SETUP into the command line box, and click the OK button.
5. Upon the startup of the installation program, the following dialogue box is
displayed.
Figure A-1-1 Installation Inspection
6. Select an item to be installed from the list in the top of the dialogue box, and press
the downward arrow button. After all the contents to be installed have been
cataloged into the list at the bottom of the dialogue box, click the OK button. The
following are the contents which can be installed:
Å°Å°Å° CHAPTER 1. INSTALLATION
120
121
Sprite Editor: Executable file for the sprite editor
Tutorial: Sample data for the tutorial
Documents: Instruction manual and format description
The following dialogue box is displayed.
Figure A-1-2 Path Setting
7. Specify the destination directory, and click the OK button.
Now, the sprite editor has been installed. Catalog groups and icons if needed.
CHAPTER 1. INSTALLATION Å°Å°Å°
122
Å°Å° CHAPTER 1. INSTALLATION
APPENDIX B
CHAPTER 1
SPECIFICATIONS OF
IMAGE DATA (TIM FILE)
1 Image Data File
The TIM file covers standard images handled by the PlayStation unit, and can be
transferred directly to its VRAM. It can be used commonly as sprite patterns and 3D texture
mapping materials.
The following are the image data modes (color counts) handled by the PlayStation unit.
A. 4bit CLUT
B. 8bit CLUT
C. 16bit Direct color
D. 24bit Direct color
The VRAM supported by the PlayStation unit is based on 16 bits. Thus, only 16- and 24-
bit data can be transferred directly to the frame buffer for display. Use as sprite pattern or
polygon texture mapping data allows the selection of any of 4-bit, 8-bit and 16-bit modes.
2
Whole File Configuration
The TIM file has the header file at its start and is composed of a few blocks.
Figure B-1-1 Whole TIM File Configuration
Å°Å°Å° CHAPTER 1. SPECIFICATIONS OF IMAGE DATA (TIM FILE)
126
127
Data is of a 32-bit binary format. Because of LittleEndian, bytes are arranged in
ascending order. (See Figure B-1-2.)
Figure B-1-2 Byte Order in File
2.1 ID
The file ID is composed of one word, having the following bit configuration.
Figure B-1-3 Structure of TIM File Header
2.2 Flag
FLAG is 32-bit length data carrying information on data structure. The following
gives the bit configuration.
Figure B-1-4 FLAG Bit Configuration
CHAPTER 1. SPECIFICATIONS OF IMAGE DATA (TIM FILE) Å°Å°
bit0-7 =ID: 0x10
bit8-15=VERSION : 0x00
bit0-2=PMODE Pixel mode (Bit length)
0: 4bit CLUT
1: 8bit CLUT
2: 16bit Direct
3: 24bit Direct
Others: Reserved
bit3 =CF Whether CLUT exists
0: There is no CLUT section
1: There is a CLUT section
128
Å°Å° CHAPTER 1. SPECIFICATIONS OF IMAGE DATA (TIM FILE)
2.3 CLUT Section
Image data put in the 4-bit/8-bit color mode uses CLUT. If the value of the CF flag
in the header is ‘1’, the TIM file has CLUT (color palette). The CLUT section begins
with byte count information (bnum), followed by inner-VRAM positional information,
image size and the main data body.
Figure B-1-5 Structure of CLUT Section
In the 4-bit mode, one CLUT set is composed of 16 CLUT entries. In the 8-bit
mode, one CLUT set is composed of 256 CLUT entries. As CLUT is located on the
VRAM, the PlayStation unit handles a CLUT section in the TIM file as a rectangular
VRAM image. This means that one CLUT entry is equivalent to one pixel. Thus, one
CLUT set is dealt with as rectangular image data with a height of 1 and a width of 16
in the 4-bit mode, and with a height of 1 and a width of 256 in the 8-bit mode.
One TIM file can contain two or more CLUT sets. The area where two or more
CLUT sets are located is handled as a piece of image data and written in the CLUT
section.
One CLUT entry expressing one color has the following configuration.
Figure B-1-6 CLUT Entry
The transparency control bit is applicable to sprite and texture data. If all of R, G,
B and STP are zero, the color is considered to be transparent. If not, the color is
considered to be opaque.
bnum Data length of CLUT section
(in bytes) (including four bytes of bnum)
DX x coordinate in the VRAM
DY y coordinate in the VRAM
H Vertical data size
W Horizontal data size
CLUTi CLUT entry (16 bits per entry)
STP Transparency control bit
R Red component (5 bits)
G Green component (5 bits)
B Blue component (5 bits)
129
For semitransparency processing, the color is regarded as being semitransparent
when the STP value is 1. If not, the color is regarded as being opaque. (Only under all
zeros, the color is considered to be transparent.)
Table A-1-1 Role of STP Bit
2.4 Pixel Data Section
The pixel data section is the main body of image data. Because the VRAM
supported by the PlayStation system is based on the 16-bit configuration, image data is
composed of units of 16 bits.
Figure B-1-7 Configuration of Pixel Data Section
The configuration of a piece of VRAM data (16 bits) depends on the mode. The
following gives the configuration in each mode.
CHAPTER 1. SPECIFICATIONS OF IMAGE DATA (TIM FILE) Å°Å°Å°
bnum Data length of pixel data CLUT section
(in bytes) (including four bytes of bnum)
DX x coordinate in the VRAM
DY y coordinate in the VRAM
H Vertical data size
W Horizontal data size
DATAi VRAM data (16 bits)
130
Å°Å° CHAPTER 1. SPECIFICATIONS OF IMAGE DATA (TIM FILE)
Figure B-1-8 VRAM Data (Pixel Data)
As the VRAM coordinate system is based on 16 bits/pixel, note coordinate/size
values in TIM data. In the 4-bit mode, a value of 1/4 in the X axis direction is H and,
in the 8-bit mode, a value of 1/2 is H. Thus, in the 4-bit mode, the image size must be
a multiple of 4, while, in the 8-bit mode, the image size must be even.
(4-bit mode)
(8-bit mode)
(16-bit mode)
pix0-3 Pixel value (CLUT No.)
Pixels 0, 1, 2 and 3 are arranged from the
left in that order.
pix0-1 Pixel value (CLUT No.)
Pixels 0 and 1 are arranged from the left in
that order.
STP Transparency control bit
R Red component (5 bits)
G Green component (5 bits)
B Blue component (5 bits)
(24-bit mode)
CHAPTER 2
SPECIFICATIONS OF
PIXEL IMAGE DATA
(PXL FILE)
1
PXL Format
The PXL file saves 8-bit or 4-bit pixel images of index color edited by the PlayStation
sprite editor.
2
Whole File Configuration
The PXL file has the file header at the start, and is composed of a few blocks.
Figure B-2-1 Whole PXL File Configuration
Data is of the 32-bit binary format. Because of LittleEndian, bytes are arranged in
ascending order. (See Figure B-2-2.)
Figure B-2-2 Byte Order in File
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. SPECIFICATIONS OF PIXEL IMAGE DATA (PXL FILE)
132
2.1 ID
The file ID is composed of one word, having the following bit configuration.
Figure B-2-3 Structure of PXL File Header
2.2 FLAG
FLAG is 32-bit length data, carrying information of data structure. It has the following bit configuration.
Figure B-2-4 FLAG Bit Configuration
2.3 Pixel Data Section
The pixel data section is the main body of image data.
Figure B-2-5 Configuration of Pixel Data Section
The configuration of a piece of VRAM data (16 bits) depends on the mode. The
following gives the configuration in each mode.
133
CHAPTER 2. SPECIFICATIONS OF PIXEL IMAGE DATA (PXL FILE) Å°Å°
bit0-7 =ID: 0x11
bit8-15=VERSION : 0x00
bit0 =PMODE Pixel mode (Bit length)
0:4bit CLUT
1:8bit CLUT
bnum Data length of pixel data CLUT section (in bytes)
(including 48 bytes of bnum)
DX x coordinate in the VRAM
DY y coordinate in the VRAM
H Vertical data size
W Horizontal data size
DATAi VRAM data (16 bits)
134
Å°Å° CHAPTER 2. SPECIFICATIONS OF PIXEL IMAGE DATA (PXL FILE)
Figure B-2-6 VRAM Data (Pixel Data)
The coordinate system for the VRAM is based on 16 bits per pixel. Thus, note
coordinate/size values in TIM data. In the X axis direction, a value of 2/4 is H in the
4-bit mode, and a value of 1/2 is H in the 8-bit mode. This means that, in the 4-bit
mode, the image size must be a multiple of 4 and, in the 8-bit mode, the image size
must be even.
(4-bit mode)
(8-bit mode)
(16-bit mode)
pix0-3 Pixel value (CLUT No.)
Pixels 0, 1, 2 and 3 are arranged from the
left in that order.
pix0-1 Pixel value (CLUT No.)
Pixels 0 and 1 are arranged from the left in
that order.
STP Transparency control bit
R Red component (5 bits)
G Green component (5 bits)
B Blue component (5 bits)
CHAPTER 3
SPECIFICATIONS OF
PALETTE DATA
(CLT FILE)
1
CLT Format
The CLT file saves 8-bit or 4-bit palette data edited by the PlayStation sprite editor.
2
Whole File Configuration
The CLT file has the file header at the start, being composed of a few blocks.
Figure B-3-1 Whole CLT File Configuration
Data is of the 32-bit binary format. Because of LittleEndian, bytes are arranged in
ascending order. (See Figure B-3-2.)
Figure B-3-2 Byte Order in File
Å°Å°Å° CHAPTER 3. SPECIFICATIONS OF PALETTE DATA (CLT FILE)
136
2.1 ID
The file ID is composed of one word, having the following bit configuration.
Figure B-3-3 Structure of TIM File Header
2.2 FLAG
FLAG is 32-bit length data, carrying information on data structure. It has the
following bit configuration.
Figure B-3-4 FLAG Bit Configuration
2.3 CLUT Section
The CLUT section begins with data on its byte count (bnum), followed by innerVRAM positional information, index size and the main data body.
Figure B-3-5 Structure of CLUT Section
137
CHAPTER 3. SPECIFICATIONS OF PALETTE DATA (CLT FILE) Å°Å°Å°
bit0-7 =ID: 0x12
bit8-15=VERSION : 0x00
bit0-1 =PMODE 0x2
bnum Data length of the CLUT section
DX x coordinate in the VRAM
DY y coordinate in the VRAM
H Vertical data size
W Horizontal data size
CLUTi VRAM data (16 bits per entry)
138
Å°Å° CHAPTER 3. SPECIFICATIONS OF PALETTE DATA (CLT FILE)
One CLUT set is composed of 16 CLUT entries in the 4-bit mode and of 256
CLUT entries in the 8-bit mode. (However, one file is composed of 16 sets of CLT
data output from the sprite editor in the 4-bit mode.)
As CLUT is located on the VRAM, the PlayStation system handles the CLUT
section in a TIM file as a rectangular VRAM image. This means that one CLUT entry
is equivalent to one pixel in the VRAM. Thus, one CLUT set is handled as rectangular
image data having a height of 1 and a width of 16 in the 4-bit mode and a height of 1
and a width of 256 in the 8-bit mode. (CLUT data output from the sprite editor is a
rectangular image with a height of 16 and a width of 16 in the 4-bit mode.)
One TIM file can contain two or more CLUT sets. The area composed of two or
more CLUT sets is considered to be a piece of image data and written in the CLUT
section.
A CLUT entry, which expresses one color, has the following configuration.
Figure B-3-6 CLUT Entry
The transparency control bit is applicable to sprite and texture data. If all of R, G,
B and STP are zero, the color is regarded as being transparent. If not, the color is
considered to be opaque.
For semitransparency processing, if the STP value is 1, the color is considered to
be semitransparent. If not, the color is regarded as being opaque. (Only in all zeros,
the color is considered to be transparent.)
Table A-3-1 Role of STP Bit
STP Transparency control bit
R Red component (5 bits)
G Green component (5 bits)
CHAPTER 4
SPECIFICATIONS
OF CELL DATA
(CEL FILE)
1
CEL Format
The CEL file provides a table of VRAM pointers to cells constituting the BG plane.
2
File Format
The CEL file has the header file at the start, being composed of three blocks.
Figure B-4-1 Whole CELL Data Configuration
2.1 HEADER
The file header has the following configuration.
Figure B-4-2 HEADER
Å°Å°Å° CHAPTER 4. SPECIFICATIONS OF CELL DATA (CEL FILE)
140
FLAG Described later
ID 0x22
VERSION 0x04
NCELL Cell data count (in cells)
CELL_W Horizontal size of cell display window
(in cells) (Sprite editor)
CELL_H Vertical size of cell display window
(in cells) (Sprite editor)
FLAG has the following bit configuration.
Figure B-4 FLAG
2.2 CELL
Cell data provides a table of VRAM pointers to cells constituting BG. Four bytes
form one cell.
Figure B-4-4 CELL Data Section
CBA has the following bit configuration.
Figure B-4-5 CBA
141
CHAPTER 4. SPECIFICATIONS OF CELL DATA (CEL FILE) Å°Å°
ATT Whether the file contains the ATTR block
0: ATTR not contained
1: ATTR contained
ATL ATTR data length
0: 8bit
1: 16bit
u Horizontal offset address from the base
address of texture page (8 bits)
v Vertical offset address from the base
address of texture page (8 bits)
CBA Described later
FLAG Described later
TSB Described later
CLX X coordinate of start of CLUT/16 (6 bits)
CLY Y coordinate of start of CLUT (9 bits)
ABE 0: Semitransparency processing turned off
1: Semitransparency processing turned on
142
Å°Å° CHAPTER 4. SPECIFICATIONS OF CELL DATA (CEL FILE)
TSB has the following bit configuration.
Figure B-4-6 TSB
FLAG has the following bit configuration.
Figure B-4-7 FLAG
2.3 ATTR
Attribute data is information added to cells, being arranged in the same order as the cells.
Figure B-4-8 ATTR
VLP Information on vertical inversion
HLP Information on horizontal inversion
TPN Texture page number
ABR Semitransparency rate
00: 0.50xF + 0.50xB
01: 1.00xF + 1.00xB
10: -1.00xF + 1.00xB
11: 0.25xF + 1.00xB
TPF Depth of texture pattern pixel
00: 4bit
01: 8bit
10: 16bit
BNO TIM bank number (Sprite editor)
CSN Color set number (Sprite editor)
8-bit attribute
16-bit attribute
CHAPTER 5
SPECIFICATIONS OF MAP
DATA (BGD FILE)
1
BGD Format
The BGD file provides data constituting the BG plane used in the 2D system. BG
refers to any row of rectangular pixel data. The BGD file is used along with the TIM
and CEL files having the same name. Actual pixel images are carried by the TIM file.
2
File Format
The BGD file has the header file at the start, being composed of three blocks.
However, the ATTR section can be omitted.
Figure B-5-1 Whole BG Data Configuration
2.1 HEADER
The file head has the following configuration.
Figure B-5-2 HEADER
144
Å°Å° CHAPTER 5. SPECIFICATIONS OF MAP DATA (BGD FILE)
FLAG: Described later
ID: 0x23
VERSION: 0x00
MAPW: Horizontal size of BG map data (in pixels)
MAPH: Vertical size of BG map data (in pixels)
CELL_W: Horizontal size of cell data (in pixels)
CELL_H: Vertical size of cell data (in pixels)
FLAG has the following bit configuration.
Figure B-5-3 FLAG
2.2 MAP
If one BG section is assumed to be composed of a set of MAPH x MAPW cells, the
map describes the order of cell arrangement.
Figure B-5-4 Cell Arrangement in Map (8 x 8)
Map data is a set of cell numbers arranged in the above number order. A cell
number indicates the position of the cell in a cell file described later.
Figure B-5-5 MAP
145
CHAPTER 5. SPECIFICATIONS OF MAP DATA (BGD FILE) Å°Å°
ATT Whether the file contains the ATTR block
0: ATTR not contained
1: ATTR contained
ATL ATTR data length
0: 8bit
1: 16bit
146
Å°Å° CHAPTER 5. SPECIFICATIONS OF MAP DATA (BGD FILE)
2.3 ATTR
Attribute data is information added to MAP, being arranged in the same order as
MAP.
Figure B-5-6 ATTR
(8-bit mode)
(16-bit mode)
CHAPTER 6
SPECIFICATION OF
ANIMATION DATA
(ANM FILE)
1
ANM Format
The ANM file stores information for image data animations. It is used along with a TIM
file, which carries actual pixel images.
2
File Format
The ANM file has the header file at the start, being composed of four blocks.
Figure B-6-1 Whole ANM Data Configuration
2.1 HEADER
The file header has the following configuration.
Figure B-6-2 HEADER
Å°Å°Å° CHAPTER 6. SPECIFICATIONS OF ANIMATION DATA (ANM FILE)
148
FLAG: Described later
ID: 0x21
VERSION: 0x03
NSPRITEGp: Sprite group count
NSEQUENCE: Sequence data count
FLAG has the following bit configuration.
Figure B-6-3 FLAG
2.2 SEQUENCE
Sequence data provides a set of coordinates of the hot spots in the frames, display
time and sprite group numbers.
Figure B-6-4 SEQUENCE
2.3 SPRITEGp
Sprite group data is a set of sprite groups, describing where a sprite is to be
displayed in a frame.
149
CHAPTER 6. SPECIFICATIONS OF ANIMATION DATA (ANM FILE) Å°Å°
CLT CLUT count for color animations
TPF Depth of texture pattern pixel
00: 4bit
01: 8bit
EEE
SprGpNo Number of sprite group to be displayed
TIME Display time
ATTR Attribute
X X coordinate of hot spot
Y Y coordinate of hot spot
150
Å°Å° CHAPTER 6. SPECIFICATIONS OF ANIMATION DATA (ANM FILE)
Figure B-6-5 SPRITEGp
NSprite Number of sprites in a sprite group
u Horizontal offset from base address of texture page
v Vertical offset from base address of texture page
Ofs X Horizontal offset from hot spot in a frame
Ofs Y Vertical offset from hot spot in a frame
CBA Described later
FLAG Described later
W Sprite width (Omitted if FLAG’s THW is not zero)
H Sprite height (Omitted if FLAG’s THW is not zero)
ROT Rotation angle (360 degrees = 4096)
FLAG2 Described later
X,Y Rate of extension or reduction (Power of 1.0 = 4096).
(A negative sign indicates inversion.)
151
FLAG has the following bit configuration.
Figure B-6-6 FLAG
CBA has the following bit configuration.
Figure B-6-7 CBA
FLAG2 has the following bit configuration.
Figure B-6-8 FLAG2
CHAPTER 6. SPECIFICATIONS OF ANIMATION DATA (ANM FILE) Å°Å°Å°
TPN Texture page number
ABR Semitransparency rate
00: 0.50xF + 0.50xB
01: 1.00xF + 1.00xB
10: -1.00xF + 1.00xB
11: 0.25xF + 1.00xB
TPF Depth of texture pattern pixel
00: 4bit
01: 8bit
10: 16bit
RSZ 0: Neither extension nor reduction supported
1: Extension and reduction supported
ROT 0: Rotation not supported
1: Rotation supported
THW Rectangular sprite area size divided by 8. If not divided,
the size is specified for H and W described previously.
CLX X coordinate of CLUT start/16 (6 bits)
CLY Y coordinate of CLUT start (9 bits)
ABE 0: Semitransparency processing turned off
1: Semitransparency processing turned on
BNO TIM bank number (Sprite editor)
CSN Color set (Sprite editor)
152
Å°Å° CHAPTER 6. SPECIFICATIONS OF ANIMATION DATA (ANM FILE)
2.4 CLUTGp
CLUTGp is a set of CLUT groups for color animations. (CLT of HEADER FLAG
is used to specify the number of CLUT groups.)
Figure B-6-9 CLUTGp
bnum Data length of CLUT section
DX x coordinate in the VRAM
DY y coordinate in the VRAM
Çg Vertical data size
W Horizontal data size
CLUTi CLUT entry (16 bits per entry)
CHAPTER 7
ANIMATION TIME
SEQUENCE FILE
(TSQ FILE)
1
TSQ Format
The TSQ file stores time sequence data for sprite animations edited by the PlayStation
sprite editor.
2
File Format
The TSQ file has the header file at the start, being composed of two blocks.
Figure B-7-1 Whole SEQ Data Configuration
2.1 HEADER
The file header has the following configuration.
Figure B-7-2 HEADER
Å°Å°Å° CHAPTER 7. ANIMATION TIME SEQUENCE FILE (TSQ FILE)
154
ID: 0x24
VERSION: 0x01
NSEQUENCE: Sequence data count
2.2 SEQUENCE
Sequence data is a set of coordinates of the hot spots in the frames, display time,
and sprite group numbers.
Figure B-7-3 SEQUENCE
155
CHAPTER 7. ANIMATION TIME SEQUENCE FILE (TSQ FILE) Å°Å°
EEE
SprGpNo Number of sprite group to be displayed
TIME Display time
ATTR Attribute
X X coordinate of hot spot
Y Y coordinate of hot spot
156
Å°Å° CHAPTER 7. ANIMATION TIME SEQUENCE FILE (TSQ FILE)
CHAPTER 8
SPRITE EDITOR
PROJECT FILE
(SDF FILE)
1
SDF Format
The SDF file stores file groups and setting information edited by the PlayStation sprite
editor. The file enables all files to be loaded at a time.
2
File Format
The SDF file is composed of the following seven blocks.
Figure B-8-1 Whole SDF File Configuration
The block is composed of lines assigned key word values.
2.1 TIM
The key word of the TIM block is “TIM” plus a bank number.
The value provides a file name. As the file name, only the TIM file or a
combination of PXL and CLT files is accepted.
Å°Å° CHAPTER 8. SPRITE EDITOR PROJECT FILE (SDF FILE)
158
Example
TIM0 file0.tim
TIM1 file1.pxl file1.clt
TIM2
TIM3
Note
The key word of a bank not used must not be omitted, but assigned an item having
no value.
2.2 CEL
The key word of the CEL block is CEL0, and the value is a file name.
Example
CEL0 file2.cel
2.3 MAP
The key word of the MAP block is “MAP” plus a bank number, and the value
provides a file name.
Example
MAP0 file3.bgd
MAP1 file4.bgd
MAP2
MAP3
Note
The key word of a bank not used must not be omitted, but assigned an item having
no value.
2.4 ANM
The key word of the ANM block is ANM0, and the value provides a file name.
159
CHAPTER 8. SPRITE EDITOR PROJECT FILE (SDF FILE) Å°Å°
160
Å°Å° CHAPTER 8. SPRITE EDITOR PROJECT FILE (SDF FILE)
Example
ANM0 file5.anm
2.5 DISPLAY
A DISPLAY block specifies an artist board screen mode.
The key word is DISPLAY. VALUE depends on the screen mode.
Example
DISPLAY1
2.6 COLOR
A COLOR block specifies a color mode. The key word is DISPLAY. The value
depends on the color mode.
Example
COLOR0
161
2.7 ADDR
An ADDR block specifies coordinates of images set by a TIM bank, palette
coordinates, and the number of color sets.
The following gives the specification format.
ADDR? :X Y CX CY N
ADDR?: KEYWORD (“ADDR” plus bank number)
X: X coordinate of TIM image
Y: Y coordinate of TIM image
CX: X coordinate of palette
CY: Y coordinate of palette
N: Number of color sets
Example
ADDR0 768 0 0 480 16
ADDR1 768 256 0 496 16
ADDR2 512 0 256 480 16
ADDR3 512 256 256 496 16
CHAPTER 8. SPRITE EDITOR PROJECT FILE (SDF FILE) Å°Å°
162
Å°Å° CHAPTER 8. SPRITE EDITOR PROJECT FILE (SDF FILE)
INDEX
164
16-bit attribute...........................................................................................................61
16 colors....................................................................................................................56
256 colors..................................................................................................................56
A
ABOARD.EXE...........................................................................................................4
ANM.......................................................................................................................148
B
BGD........................................................................................................................144
C
CLT.........................................................................................................................136
CEL.........................................................................................................................140
I
I/O address..................................................................................................................4
P
PXL.........................................................................................................................132
T
TIM.........................................................................................................................126
TIM output information dialogue box......................................................................50
Whole TIM display window...............................................................................46, 96
Setting of TIM bank coordinates..............................................................................64
Dialogue box for setting TIM bank coordinates.......................................................65
TSQ.........................................................................................................................154
S
STP..........................................................................................................100, 115, 128
SDF.........................................................................................................................158
165
Ç†
Artist board screen mode..........................................................................................57
Items transferred to artist board................................................................................57
Icon ...........................................................................................................................46
Compression.............................................................................................................55
Attribute................................................................................................59, 77, 93, 108
Attribute and semitransparency setting dialogue box...............................................59
Animation.........................................................................................................94, 148
Animation setting......................................................................................................62
Animation setting dialogue box................................................................................62
Animation display window.....................................................................................101
Undo..........................................................................................................................54
Undo buffer...............................................................................................................54
Movement.................................................................................................................86
Number of colors......................................................................................................56
Color replacement.....................................................................................................84
Window selection ...................................................................................................110
Total clearing............................................................................................................92
Ç©
Rotation.....................................................................................................................90
Color set............................................................................................................65, 114
Color palette......................................................................................................99, 128
Character...................................................................................................................56
Character compression..............................................................................................55
Character compression dialogue box........................................................................55
Grid.............................................................................................................64, 69, 109
Gradation ................................................................................................................100
Grid color setting......................................................................................................64
Grid color setting dialogue box ................................................................................64
Copy..........................................................................................................................87
Ç³
Sub-grid ..................................................................................................................109
Termination...............................................................................................................53
Short cut key...........................................................................................................112
Scroll.........................................................................................................................90
Snap ..........................................................................................................................63
166
Snap setting...............................................................................................................63
Sprite group display window..................................................................................101
Sprite display X offset..............................................................................................57
Sprite display Y offset..............................................................................................58
Sprite display window ............................................................................................101
Saving all files ..........................................................................................................53
Cell............................................................................................................................92
Cell compression.......................................................................................................55
Cell size.....................................................................................................................58
Reduced cell display.................................................................................................61
Cell display window.................................................................................................97
Foreground color.......................................................................................................99
Foreground color display area..................................................................................99
ÇW
Ellipse.......................................................................................................................91
Time sequence........................................................................................................154
Time table.........................................................................................................49, 106
Dialogue box for loading time table.........................................................................49
Time table display window.....................................................................................105
Rectangle ..................................................................................................................85
Tool palette.........................................................................................................46, 82
Tool bar...............................................................................................................46, 74
Opening definition file..............................................................................................52
Saving definition file ................................................................................................52
Texture mapping.....................................................................................................126
Transparent.............................................................................................................100
Cancel.......................................................................................................................54
Ç»
Saving under name....................................................................................................50
Masked color.............................................................................................................88
Coloring....................................................................................................................86
ÇÕ
Background...............................................................................................................62
Background color....................................................................................................100
Power........................................................................................................................67
167
Dashed line ...............................................................................................................82
Palette......................................................................................................................114
Palette display window.............................................................................................46
Inversion .............................................................................................................88, 89
Bank..................................................................................................49, 50, 64, 67, 76
Bank setting dialogue box.........................................................................................68
Semitransparency information............................................................................60, 77
Semitransparent ......................................................................................................100
Semitransparency processing..................................................................................129
Semitransparency display.......................................................................................115
Semitransparency button...........................................................................................99
Semitransparent area button......................................................................................99
Semitransparency rate.............................................................................................104
Video monitor...............................................................................................18, 79, 80
Display color...........................................................................................................114
Display power.....................................................................................................67, 76
Display power setting dialogue box..........................................................................67
File type ....................................................................................................................48
Opening file ..............................................................................................................48
Fix.............................................................................................................................54
Project file.................................................................................................................52
Paint window ....................................................................................................46, 109
Pen size...................................................................................................................113
Polygon...................................................................................................................113
Ç‹
Mask copy.................................................................................................................88
Map attribute.............................................................................................................59
Map size....................................................................................................................58
Reduced map display................................................................................................61
Map size specification dialogue box.........................................................................59
Map display window.................................................................................................98
Main grid.................................................................................................................109
Menu.........................................................................................................................46
ÇÁ
Size modification......................................................................................................89
Redo..........................................................................................................................54
Reload.......................................................................................................................69
Sprite Editor User’s Manual
for Sprite Editor Version1.7
PlayStation Artist Tool
● This manual is distributed to the licensee of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. The
manual is prohibited from being duplicated or distributed without prior consent, and
from being disclosed or leaked to any third party under the licensee agreement.
● PlayStation is a registered trademark of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc.
● The corporate and product names covered in this manual are trademarks. In the
manual, R and TM marks are not used.
Issued in March 1995 by Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. All rights reserved.
Designed and prepared by Sony Computer Entertainment Inc.
Akasaka Ohji Building, 8-1-22, Minato-Ku, Tokyo 107
Phone: 03-3475-7300
For further information, please feel free to contact the business department (03-3475-7320).