Performance Analyzer User Guide
© 1998 Sony Computer Entertainment Inc.
Publication date: August 1998
Sony Computer Entertainment America
919 E. Hillsdale Blvd., 2nd floor
Foster City, CA 94404
Sony Computer Entertainment Europe
Waverley House
7-12 Noel Street
London W1V 4HH, England
The Performance Analyzer User Guide manual is supplied pursuant to and subject to the terms of the Sony
Computer Entertainment PlayStation® License and Development Tools Agreements, the Licensed
Publisher Agreement and/or the Licensed Developer Agreement.
The Performance Analyzer User Guide manual is intended for distribution to and use by only Sony
Computer Entertainment licensed Developers and Publishers in accordance with the PlayStation® License
and Development Tools Agreements, the Licensed Publisher Agreement and/or the Licensed Developer
Agreement.
Unauthorized reproduction, distribution, lending, rental or disclosure to any third party, in whole or in part, of
this book is expressly prohibited by law and by the terms of the Sony Computer Entertainment
PlayStation® License and Development Tools Agreements, the Licensed Publisher Agreement and/or the
Licensed Developer Agreement.
Ownership of the physical property of the book is retained by and reserved by Sony Computer
Entertainment. Alteration to or deletion, in whole or in part, of the book, its presentation, or its contents is
prohibited.
The information in the Performance Analyzer User Guide manual is subject to change without notice. The
content of this book is Confidential Information of Sony Computer Entertainment.
PlayStation and PlayStation logos are registered trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. All other
trademarks are property of their respective owners and/or their licensors.
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Table of Contents
About This Manual v
Changes Since Last Release v
Related Documentation v
Manual Structure v
Developer Reference Series v
Typographic Conventions vi
Developer Support vii
Chapter 1: Overview
Required Equipment, Recommended Hardware 1-3
Features 1-3
Using the Performance Analyzer with the software development tools 1-3
Chapter 2: Tutorial Chapter 2: Tutorial
Measurement Using the Basic Setup 2-3
Basic Operations 2-5
Operation of Analysis Tools 2-17
Chapter 3: Using the Trigger Function
Setting the Trigger Conditions 3-3
Setting the Measurement Range 3-5
Techniques 3-6
Chapter 4: Details
Menus and Buttons 4-3
Main Window Description 4-6
Option Setup 4-11
iv Table of Contents
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Performance Analyzer User Guide
About This Manual
This manual is the latest release of instructions relating to the PlayStation® Performance Analyzer as of
Run-Time Library release 4.3. The purpose of this manual is to provide general instructions on using the
Performance Analyzer software.
Changes Since Last Release
There have been no substantive changes to this manual since the previous release, which described
software version 2.04.
Related Documentation
This manual should be read in conjunction with the Performance Analyzer Technical Reference.
Manual Structure
Section Description
Ch. 1: Overview —
Ch. 2: Tutorial Describes, using a sample program, the basics
of operating the Performance Analyzer (hereafter
abbreviated to PA), including measurement using
the basic setup and reading the measured
results.
Ch. 3: Using the Trigger Function Describes setting the conditions supported by
the trigger function. The use of the trigger
function enables the measurement of the target
frame.
Ch. 4: Details Describes the menus, buttons and graphs
displayed in the main window.
Developer Reference Series
This manual is part of the Developer Reference Series, a series of technical reference volumes covering all
aspects of PlayStation development. The complete series is listed below:
Manual Description
PlayStation Hardware Describes the PlayStation hardware architecture
and overviews its subsystems.
PlayStation Operating System Describes the PlayStation operating system and
related programming fundamentals.
Run-Time Library Overview Describes the structure and purpose of the
run-time libraries provided for PlayStation
software development.
Run-Time Library Reference Defines all available PlayStation run-time library
functions, macros and structures.
Inline Programming Reference Describes in-line programming using DMPSX,
GTE inline macro and GTE register information.
SDevTC Development Environment Describes the SDevTC (formerly "Psy-Q")
Development Environment for PlayStation
software development.
vi About This Manual
Performance Analyzer User Guide
3D Graphics Tools Describes how to use the PlayStation 3D
Graphics Tools, including the animation and
material editors.
Sprite Editor Describes the Sprite Editor tool for creating
sprite data and background picture
components.
Sound Artist Tool Provides installation and operation instructions
for the DTL-H800 Sound Artist Board and
explains how to use the Sound Artist Tool
software.
File Formats Describes all native PlayStation data formats.
Data Conversion Utilities Describes all available PlayStation data
conversion utilities, including both stand-alone
and plug-in programs.
CD Emulator Provides installation and operation instructions
for the CD Emulator subsystem and related
software.
CD-ROM Generator Describes how to use the CD-ROM Generator
software to write CD-R discs.
Performance Analyzer User Guide Provides general instructions for using the
Performance Analyzer software.
Performance Analyzer Technical Reference Describes how to measure software
performance and interpret the results using the
Performance Analyzer.
DTL-H2000 Installation and Operation Provides installation and operation instructions
for the DTL-H2000 Development System.
DTL-H2500/2700 Installation and Operation Provides installation and operation instructions
for the DTL-H2500/H2700 Development
Systems.
Typographic Conventions
Certain Typographic Conventions are used through out this manual to clarify the meaning of the text. The
following conventions apply to all narrative text except for structure and function descriptions:
Convention Meaning
courier Indicates literal program code.
Bold Indicates a document, chapter or section title.
The following conventions apply within structure and function descriptions only:
Convention Meaning
Medium Bold Denotes structure or function types and names.
Italic Denotes function arguments and structure members.
About This Manual vii
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Developer Support
Sony Computer Entertainment America (SCEA) Sony Computer Entertainment America (SCEA)
SCEA developer support is available to licensees in North America only. You may obtain developer support
or additional copies of this documentation by contacting the following addresses:
Order Information Developer Support
In North AmericaIn North America In North America In North America In North America In North AmericaIn North America In North America
Attn: Developer Tools Coordinator E-mail: DevTech_Support@playstation.sony.com
Sony Computer Entertainment America Web: http://www.scea.sony.com/dev
919 East Hillsdale Blvd., 2nd floor Developer Support Hotline: (650) 655-8181
Foster City, CA 94404 (Call Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.,
Tel: (650) 655-8000 PST/PDT)
Sony Computer Entertainment Europe (SCEE) Sony Computer Entertainment Europe (SCEE)
SCEE developer support is available to licensees in Europe only. You may obtain developer support or
additional copies of this documentation by contacting the following addresses:
Order Information Developer Support
In EuropeIn Europe In Europe In Europe In Europe In EuropeIn Europe In Europe
Attn: Production Coordinator E-mail: dev_support@playstation.co.uk
Sony Computer Entertainment Europe Web: https://www-s.playstation.co.uk
Waverley House Developer Support Hotline:
7-12 Noel Street +44 (0) 171 447 1680
London W1V 4HH (Call Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.,
Tel: +44 (0) 171 447 1600 GMT or BST/BDT)
viii About This Manual
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Chapter 1:
Overview
1-2 Overview
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Overview 1-3

Performance Analyzer User Guide
Required Equipment, Recommended Hardware
The following equipment is necessary to use the Performance Analyzer:
• PlayStation Board (DTL-H2700),
• PS-X Software Development Tool,
• IBM PC/AT or compatible (with one free ISA bus slot (however, space equal to three slots is required),
Windows 95 or Windows NT4.0, at least 32 MB of RAM, 200 MB of free disk space, and a monitor
supporting a resolution of 1024 x 768, 16-bit color.)
• Performance Analyzer (DTL-S2710).
Features
The Performance Analyzer provides the following features:
• It incorporates 64 MB of DRAM so that 128-bit data corresponding to about 7.4V blanks (NTSC) or
about 6.2V blanks (PAL) can be read per clock and analyzed.
• It can observe most of the external signals of the CPU chips and the video RAM bus of the GPU. As a
result, the situations of interrupts, sub bus access and video RAM access can be identified, in addition
to the main RAM access status.
• It can easily analyze CPU data duplicate read, write buffer flush, GPU packets, etc.
• It analyzes the main RAM access situation by distinguishing between the normal and DMA transfer of
the CPU, GPU, etc. and indicates the bus usage information using colors. This makes it possible for
the user to quickly comprehend the bus access situation in a frame section.
• It is capable of displaying waveforms either as a graph or as a listing of figures, in the same way as a
logic analyzer.
• It can read map files output from compilers and display the access situation for segments and global
symbols.
• It supports the calculation of statistics for a specified range.
• It supports simple mouse-based operation in the GUI environment. Also, thanks to its use of a multidocument configuration and a split-window method, it enables the efficient comparison of large
amounts of data, the comparison of data with previously obtained and saved data, and the easy
comparison of tuning results.
• An ISA bus add-on board, used as the Performance Analyzer interface, allows measured data to be
downloaded quickly.
• The start of measurement can be triggered according to the main RAM bus address and data condition
as well as by using the trigger switch.
• It can read and analyze data of up to 6V blanks prior to the trigger position.
Using the Performance Analyzer with the software development tools
The Performance Analyzer can be used with the PlayStation software development tools concurrently, i.e., users can
use a tool such as a debugger while running the Performance Analyzer. Both environments work independently.
Therefore when the PlayStation CPU is reset, the contents of the trace memory in the Performance Analyzer
remains the same.
1-4 Overview
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Chapter 2:
Tutorial
2-2 Tutorial
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Tutorial 2-3

Performance Analyzer User Guide
Measurement Using the Basic Setup
The description given in this section covers the installation of PA, how to execute the program to be measured and
how to perform measurement using the basic setup.
Installing PA and setting up a temporary directory
Read the “\pa\setup_j.txt” file to install driver and execution files. This file is contained in the CD-ROM.
As PA uses a large amount of disk space for its temporary files (up to around 100 MB per data item), the temporary
directory must be created on a drive which has a large amount of free space.
Execute PA only after the above settings have been completed.
Figure 2-1 : State of PA before measurement
Executing the program to be measured
The program to be measured with the Performance Analyzer should be executed independently of PA. The
program can be executed either from a CD or by downloading. This is outside the scope of this manual, however.
Note that the program development environment should be set up before executing the program. For details of
setting up and using the program development environment, refer to DTL-H2500/H2700 Installation and Operation
and SDevTC Development Environment.
The following is sample usage with SDevTC combined under the Windows95 environment.
Execute the following command(s) from the DOS prompt.
[When executing a program on a CD]
C:\> resetps 0
[When downloading a program] (When executing the sample program provided with PA)
2-4 Tutorial
Performance Analyzer User Guide
C:\> CD \PA20\SAMPLE
C:\PA20\SAMPLE> resetps 1
C:\PA20\SAMPLE> run tuto0
Figure 2-2: Download Screen
The description in the subsequent sections assumes the use of the downloaded sample program.
Setting the IO port address
The IO port address should be set before using the performance analyzer (PA) to analyze the sample program.
From version 2.04, the IO Port Address must be set when the driver is installed. For further details, see
\pa\setup_j.txt.
Executing measurement using the basic setup
With the default setup, measurement start timing is specified using only a trigger switch (the provided foot switch).
Other conditions that can be used for triggering measurement include the main RAM address and data, which can
be selected with "Trigger Condition..." on “Setting” menu. For details, see Section 3.1, "Setting the Trigger
Conditions."
From “Run” menu, select "Acquisition..." The following dialog box will appear:
Tutorial 2-5

Performance Analyzer User Guide
Figure 2-3: Measurement Dialog Box
Press the trigger switch when the scene to be measured appears. Data read starts immediately, provided there is
no trigger condition other than the trigger switch, as in this example. If trigger conditions other than the trigger
switch are specified, the data to be measured once all the conditions are satisfied starts to be read when the switch
is pressed.
Figure 2-4: Dialog Box During Data Read
Basic Operations
This section describes the basic analysis operations such as main window display setting and cursor manipulation.
For details of the graphical display of the analysis, waveform and access, see the "Main Window Description."
section of this manual.
2-6 Tutorial
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Figure 2-5: State of PA After Measurement
Switching the displayed graphs
The graphs that can be displayed are seven analysis displays, a waveform display and two access displays.
Although all of the graphs are displayed by default, all can be switched on-off independently using the nine buttons
at the right-hand end of the tool bar. The graph corresponding to each button
is displayed while the button is depressed, and not displayed while the button is released.
Upon the completion of measurement, a slight delay is incurred before a graph is displayed. This delay increases as
the view size decreases and the view area increases, but can be minimized by "switching off" any graphs which
need not be displayed. For example, it is possible to set the buttons so that only the main RAM bus and video RAM
bus analysis graphs are displayed. The other graphs are displayed only when required.
Display switching can also be set using the Option dialog box. By saving the setting, it can be set as the default to
be used subsequently. For details, see the "Option Dialog Box." section of this manual.
Using the cursors and markers
Clicking the mouse in the main window causes a vertical line to appear. This is the cursor used to indicate the
position currently being examined (the cursor is located at the clock 0 point when the view is created for the first
time). Then, click the right-hand graph. You will see that a cursor can be set in it, independently of that in the left
graph. Now, open “View” menu and execute "Reset M1 to cursor point." ( ) A marker named M1 is displayed
on the scale. Clicking a point close to the marker moves the marker to the clicked point. PA has two markers,
named M1 and M2. These markers are used for marking positions and setting a range for which statistical
measurement is to be performed. Now, click the mouse, move the cursor to another position and click on the
tool bar; M2 moves to the cursor position. As shown here, the markers can also be moved with the tool bar
buttons. It is important to note that, while the window is split, the cursors of the left-hand and right-hand graphs
function independently, but M1 and M2 are common to both windows.
Tutorial 2-7
Performance Analyzer User Guide
After measurement, another marker MT, which is used to indicate the trigger point, is displayed. Clicking on the
tool bar moves the cursor to the trigger point.
Figure 2-6: Cursor, Markers and Trigger Position
Enlarging or reducing the view
To display a wider area by reducing the view, select "Reduce Scale" from ”View” menu. This opens another menu
which allows you to select any of a variety of view sizes. For example, selecting "Zoom Out" reduces the view to half
its current size. To enlarge the view, select "Increase Scale" from “View” menu. Then, specify the size in the same
way as above. Selecting "Zoom In" enlarges the view to twice its current size. To return to the actual size (where
each pixel corresponds to a clock pulse), select "Normal size" from “View” menu. These view size change
commands are applicable to all views, even when the window is split. The size is displayed at the top left of the
view, and the display is scrolled so that the cursor is centered.
In much the same way as the Move commands, the view size change commands are also registered on the tool
bar. is for zoom in, is for zoom out, and is for the normal size. , and allow the user to
change the view size so that the display of the respective frame sections fills the screen (note, however, that the
sections may not be displayed correctly when a compact display device is used).
Changing the analysis display and pixel width
The analysis display is a vertical bar when the view size is set to 1, but reducing the view size turns the one pixelwide bar into a histogram. For example, when the view size is set to 1/16, the histogram shows the percentage of
each status over 16 clocks as a color display (the order in the vertical direction is fixed in the same way as the label
on the left). Now, set the view size to 1/512; the histogram is averaged so that the change in the bus usage with
respect to time is displayed visually. Next, restore the size to 1/64. The analysis display will be as shown below.
2-8 Tutorial
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Figure 2-7: Analysis (Size 1/64, Pixel Width 1))
This display is so fine that colors mix with adjacent colors making identification difficult. Therefore, select
"Options..." from “Setting” menu and change "Analysis Pixel Width" in the Option dialog box.
Tutorial 2-9

Performance Analyzer User Guide
Figure 2-8: Setting Analysis Pixel Width (Option Dialog Box))
This option is provided to make the histogram easier to understand by changing the pixel width. The default pixel
width is one pixel. If, however, it is changed to five pixels, the analysis display will change as shown below.
2-10 Tutorial
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Figure 2-9: Analysis (Size 1/64, Pixel Width 5))
As described above, the pixel width can be changed as desired to make the display easier to understand.
Changing the display levels of the waveform display and access display
The level at which the waveform display is hidden can be set as follows: First, set the view size to 1/16 and click
OK. The waveform is displayed. Then, change the view size to 1/8 then back to 1/16. You will notice that the
waveform is displayed at 1/8 but not at 1/16. The level at which the waveform display is displayed or hidden can be
set by selecting "Options..." from “Setting” menu then changing the level of "Display level of Waveform" in the Option
dialog box. The default hidden level is 16, but if you change this level to 32, the waveform is displayed. The level at
which the access display is displayed or hidden can also be set by selecting "Options..." from “Setting” menu then
changing the level of "Display level of Access" in the Option dialog box.
Tutorial 2-11

Performance Analyzer User Guide
Figure 2-10: Waveform and Access Display (Size 1/16, Display Level 32))
Reading the map file
To read a map file, select "Read file" from “Map Info” menu.
The system currently supports the reading of the following three kinds of map files.
Remember, however, that segment information cannot be obtained with map files other than 1).
1) Map files created in the SDevTC development environment (*.map).
Example: ccpsx -O3 -Xo$80010000 /m tuto0.obj-otuto0.cpe,tuto0.sym,tuto0.map
2) Symbol files (*.dsm) created using dumpsym from symbol files created in the SDevTC development
environment (*.sym).
Example:ccpsx -O3 -Xo$80010000 tuto0.obj-otuto0.cpe,tuto0.sym
dumpsym tuto0.sym > tuto0.dsm
3) Symbol files created using nm in a development environment such as NEWS (*.nm).
Example: nm a.out > a.nm
2-12 Tutorial
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Figure 2-11: Read Map File Dialog Box
Setting the Stack Range
In the PlayStation, the stack area is set by the kernel, by the linker or by the user program. The default range of the
stack area is from 0x801C0000 to 0x80FFFFFF. These values should be changed to specify the correct stack area
for each program to show the access display correctly.
From “Setting” menu, select "Options..." then change "Stack Range of a tested program" in the Option dialog box.
Tutorial 2-13

Performance Analyzer User Guide
Figure 2-12: Option Dialog Box - Stack Range of a Tested Program
Identifying the Functions Causing Cache Misses (Use Filter)
First, specify the range of the main RAM bus where instruction burst read (cache misses) is noticeable (see Section
2.2.2, "Using the cursors and markers").
Next, check "Use filter" in “Map Info” menu. This displays the global symbols accessed within a specified range.
Among the global symbol accesses, those for which the main RAM bus is in the instruction bus read state are the
functions for which cache misses occur.
Every time the above range specification is changed, it is necessary to repeat filtering by selecting "Filtering" from
“Map Info” menu.
2-14 Tutorial
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Figure 2-13: Use Filter
Move and Search Move
When the pull-down “View” menu is displayed, you will see items including "Go to cursor" ( ), "Go to M1" (
 ), "Go to M2" ( ), “Move cursor to Trigger point” ( ), "Move V Blank point" and "Move in Clocks."
These menu items are used to move the view on the screen. Some are registered as tool bar button commands so
that they can be executed directly. When the window is split, these move commands are applied to the current
view, that is, they scroll that graph on which the mouse was last clicked. When "Move in Clocks" is selected, the
dialog box described below appears.
Specify the move destination as a clock position, then click OK to move to that point (the initial value is the current
cursor position). Note that "Move V Blank point" and "Move in Clocks" scroll the view by moving the cursor position.
The view is scrolled so that the move destination is placed at the center of the screen.
"Reset M1 to Origin" and "Reset M2 to Origin" in “View” menu move M1 and M2, respectively, to the origin
coordinate. These items do not perform scrolling. "Redraw" on “View” menu is used to refresh the view.
Figure 2-14: Move to Clock Point Dialog Box
Tutorial 2-15

Performance Analyzer User Guide
"Move to Search point" enables movement to the point where the desired conditions are satisfied, among the seven
analysis displays, waveform display and access displays. Selecting "Move to Search point" on “View” menu allows
you to specify the following search conditions:
1) Main RAM bus condition (instruction burst read, etc.).
2) Access to an arbitrarily specified address on the main RAM bus.
3) Arbitrarily specified data on the main RAM bus.
4) Sub bus condition.
5) Video RAM bus condition.
6) Range of Video RAM access (location where an access in the specified range occurred)
7) Note: Check “Range of Video RAM access” radio button to enable the condition.
8) GPU packet type.
9) Signal waveform (search according to changes such as positive-going and negative-going).
10) Read/Write penalty stall cycle position.
11) Write buffer penalty stall cycle position.
12) Polygon penalty position.
Figure 2-15: Search Dialog Box
2-16 Tutorial
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Click "Previous Search" button or "Next Search" button to start search. To cancel search, click "Stop" button. Use
"AND" and "OR" buttons to combine the search conditions.
Descriptions of the buttons are as follows:
“Method of Search” - AND/OR “AND”: Search the position satisfying all conditions.
“OR”: Search the position satisfying at least one condition.
“Previous Search” button Search the previous position satisfying the desired conditions.
“Next Search” button Search the next position satisfying the desired conditions.
“Stop” button Stop searching.
“Clear” button Clear search conditions.
“Close” button Close the search dialog box.
Using the Window (Data Comparison)
The split bar separates views. Dragging the split bar allows to change the dimensions of the view areas. To
temporarily hide split window display, move the split bar to the top/bottom or left/right edge of the screen. The split
bar can also be erased completely to return a split window to the original, non-split window by double-clicking the
split bar. If the window is split by both vertical and horizontal split bars, the original window can be re-displayed
simply by double-clicking the intersection of the vertical and horizontal split bars. Next, if you double-click the small
bar at the end of the scroll arrow of the original window, the view is split into two views. While dragging the split bar
enables the splitting of the view into arbitrarily sized areas, this operation splits the view into two views of equal
areas.
The Performance Analyzer supports a multi-document configuration, that is, it is capable of displaying several data
items simultaneously to enable their comparison. You can either open and display a previously saved file, or you can
select "Open new window" from “Window” menu to display a copy of the data already being displayed. You can
also select "New" from “File” menu, measure signals, and select "Tile" in “Window” menu. This will result in the
display of the screen shown below.
Tutorial 2-17
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Figure 2-16: Comparing Data
By combining these functions and the split window function, programs can be tuned while comparing data.
Operation of Analysis Tools
PA incorporates three analysis tools: Dump data, Statistical amount and Video RAM viewer.
Dump Data
This tool displays the data around the cursor by data dumping.
Select "Dump data..." from “Tool” menu, press the Dump data button on the tool bar or double-click the
desired position in the main window.
2-18 Tutorial
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Figure 2-17: Dump Data
The dumped data contents are as follows:
POS: Indicates the clock position.
MB STAT, R/W: Indicates the main RAM bus status.
<Blank>: Idle.
IR: Instruction burst read.
DR: CPU data read access.
DW: CPU data write access.
GR: GPU DMA data read access.
GW: GPU DMA data write access.
CR: CD read access.
CW: CD write access.
SR: SPU DMA read access.
SW: SPU DMA write access.
MR: Internal DMA read access. (Includes MDEC and OT clear).
MW: Internal DMA write access. (Includes MDEC and OT clear).
PR: PIO DMA read access.
PW: PIO DMA write access.
H: RAS pre-charge period. (An extra cycle required to access the main memory.)
R: Refresh cycle.
U: Undefined.
NWORD: Total number of words transferred in RAS cycle.
NBYTE: Total number of bytes transferred in RAS cycle. (Only write is significant.)
MADDR: Main RAM bus address. (0x80000000 is assumed as the start address.)
SYMBOL: MADDR global symbol display.
OFFSET: Offset in SYMBOL. (hex notation. Not displayed in stack.)
MWEN0-3: Bytes which are written in a word. ("w": written, "-": not written.)
SB STAT, R/W: Sub bus status.
Tutorial 2-19
Performance Analyzer User Guide
<Blank>: Idle.
RP: Read access to PIO.
WP: Write access to PIO.
RC: Read access to CD.
WC: Write access to CD.
RS: Read access to SPU.
WS: Write access to SPU.
RR: Read access to ROM.
RO: Read access to other devices.
WO: Write access to other devices.
U: Undefined.
SA: Sub bus address.
VM MODE: Video RAM bus mode.
R/W: Pixel read/write access.
RMW: Pixel read modify write (semi-transparent) access.
TXR: Texture read access
CR4: 4-bit (16-color) palette read access.
CR8: 8-bit (256-color) palette read access.
SPC: Control video RAM cycle.
VM ACC0: Access of video RAM chip 0.
VM X0: X coordinate of video RAM chip 0.
VM Y0: Y coordinate of video RAM chip 0.
VM ACC1: Access of video RAM chip 1.
VM X1: X coordinate of video RAM chip 1.
VM Y1: Y coordinate of video RAM chip 1.
GUNINT*: Interrupt request from Gun.
RXD1*: Link cable signal (received data).
DSR1*: Link cable signal (Data Set Ready).
CTS1*: Link cable signal (Clear To Send).
Note: "*" indicates a negative logic signal.
Note: If the stack range is not set properly, the global symbol having the highest address may sometimes be
mistakenly identified and displayed as the stack address.
Statistical Amount
Statistics enable the investigation of the share of main RAM bus, the memory access penalty frequency and the
number of each polygon type drawn within the specified range.
First, specify the statistic investigation range as a range between cursors M1 and M2. Then, select "Statistics..."
from “Tool” menu or press the Statistics button on the tool bar. The range confirmation dialog box is displayed.
Click OK if the range specified with the markers is satisfactory.
Figure 2-18: Range Confirmation Dialog Box
2-20 Tutorial
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Figure 2-19: Statistical Amount
Main RAM Bus:
Time(%): Indicates the percentage of the required time.
Bytes: Indicates the total number of bytes that have been transferred. However, in a
read cycle which consists only of word accesses, they are regarded as 4-
byte accesses.
Speed(MB/sec): Indicates the average transfer speed in each cycle. The maximum value
is136 MB/sec.
Clock Cycles/word: Indicates the average number of clocks required to transfer a word in each
cycle.
Estimated CPU Stall Cycles: These are the stall cycles estimated for the Data Read and Instruction Burst
Read status.
GPU Packets: Lists the total number of packets of each polygon type.
Tutorial 2-21
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Video RAM Viewer
The video RAM viewer enables the confirmation of the video RAM positions actually accessed by the CPU within the
specified range, in terms of frame buffer images.
First, specify the range to be investigated as a section between cursors M1 and M2. Then, select "Video RAM
viewer..." from “Tool” menu or press the Video RAM viewer button on the tool bar.
Figure 2-20: Video RAM Viewer
The accessed pixels are displayed in palette colors according to the access frequency (Low: Blue, High: Red). It is
also possible to display read and write accesses separately by selecting the Read/Write checkbox accordingly. This
makes it possible to read the sections where polygons are drawn, the texture and CLUT as well as to identify the
sections to be subject to semi-transparent processing.
2-22 Tutorial
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Chapter 3:
Using the Trigger Function
3-2 Using the Trigger Function
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Using the Trigger Function 3-3

Performance Analyzer User Guide
Setting the Trigger Conditions
The trigger conditions should be set to specify the timing at which the actual measurement will be started. The
default trigger condition is set only to the trigger switch (foot switch).
The trigger conditions include the trigger switch, main RAM address bus, main RAM data bus, device signal (from
the Gun or link cable). Any number of conditions can be specified. When more than one trigger condition is
specified, the reading of measurement data starts from the position where all of the specified conditions are
satisfied. It is also possible to use the measurement data of up to 6V prior to the trigger position where the trigger
conditions are satisfied.
Clicking the OK button after changing the parameters applies them to the current file. Clicking the “Save” button
applies the changed parameters to new files that are next created.
Figure 3-1: Set Trigger Condition Dialog Box
 Types of trigger conditions
First, select the trigger conditions to be used from the six conditions listed below (more than one can be selected).
For "Main RAM address bus" and "Main RAM data bus" the related items can be entered only when they are
selected here. The conditions can be inverted except for "Trigger switch" and "Main RAM address bus". By
inverting a condition, the condition is satisfied whenever the original condition is not satisfied.
3-4 Using the Trigger Function
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Trigger switch: Adds the trigger switch to the trigger conditions.
Main RAM address bus: Adds the main RAM address to the trigger conditions.
Main RAM data bus: Adds the main RAM data value to the trigger conditions.
Gun (GUNINT): Adds the Gun-related interrupt request signal to the trigger conditions.
Link cable (RXD1): Adds the link cable signal (received data) to the trigger conditions.
Link cable (DSR1): Adds the link cable signal (Data Set Ready) to the trigger conditions.
Note: When more than one condition is set, the main RAM address bus and data bus are compared at the
same timing but GUNINT, RXD1 and DSR1 are compared upon the occurrence of timing errors of a few
cycles. When the trigger switch is added to the trigger conditions, other conditions are checked after
the trigger switch is pressed. Therefore, it is not necessary to keep the trigger switch held down.
Main RAM Address Bus
The address value obtained from the main RAM address bus can be specified as a trigger condition. This address
covers all main RAM accesses including instruction burst read, data read and data write. The input should be a hex
number and the setting range be between 80000000 and 807FFFFF. The lower two bits are invalid if a size is not
specified (the size specification is explained below). The mask input should also use a hex number. When the mask
bit is 1, the bit of the corresponding address becomes a valid condition. When the mask bit is 0, it is not included in
the condition.
Example: To specify 80010000 to 8001FFFF
Address: 80010000
 Mask: FFFF0000
The address value can also be read from the symbol list, provided the map file has been read.
Figure 3-2: Reading from the Symbol List
Note: Care is required when you use the address of a function as a trigger condition, as the Performance
Analyzer cannot observe the functions in the instruction cache. This is because it can measure the
status appearing on the bus, but cannot measure the status within the CPU. Therefore, while it is
Using the Trigger Function 3-5

Performance Analyzer User Guide
possible to use a function which always causes a cache miss as a trigger condition, it is safer to use a
data address as the condition.
Main RAM Data Bus
The data value obtained from the main RAM data bus can be specified as a trigger condition. This data covers all of
the main RAM accesses including instruction burst read, data read and data write. The read/write distinction and
size can also be specified but, when a size is specified, a mask appropriate for the size should be used.
Example: To specify half-word access with a value of 1234 (hex number)
 Data value: 00001234
 Mask: 0000FFFF
Read/write and size specifications
When the "Main RAM address bus" or "Main RAM data bus", described above, is specified as a trigger condition,
the read/write distinction and size of the access can be added to the conditions. This can be set either
automatically or manually. Note that the size specification is valid only for write accesses.
Specification by data type
Read/write specification, which can be set from Read or Write, Read, and Write.
Size specification, which can be selected from Byte, Half Word and Long Word. (The size specification
can be made only with Write.)
(When Byte or Half Word is specified, the word boundary is dependent on the lower two bits of the
address. To set Byte or Half Word, which is different from the word boundary of Long Word, as the
data condition without specifying the address condition, use manual setup.)
Specification by hardware signal
Read/write can be specified using four bytes in a word.
The checkbox to the right of "3210(byte)" indicates write when checked and read when not checked.
As masks are provided below it, check those for which you wish to validate the setup. Those positions
for which the masks are not checked are not included in the condition.
NFV (Number of V blanks Before the Conditions are Satisfied) Setting
This enables the specification of the number of V blanks, before the conditions are satisfied, that are to be included
in the data measurement. A value of between 1 and 6 can be set. The default is 1, where the data in the V blank
containing the triggering position is measured.
Setting the Measurement Range
The measurements performed up to this point have been done within the default range (over 2V blanks).
To change the measurement range, select "Options..." from “Setting” menu then setting “Data Acquisition Range” in
the Option dialog box.
3-6 Using the Trigger Function
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Figure 3-3: Setting the Measurement Range (Option Dialog Box)
Clicking one of the radio buttons the corresponding clock range. The All memory radio button corresponds to the
measurement of about 7.4V blanks (NTSC) or about 6.2V blanks (PAL). Increasing the measurement range enables
the analysis of a larger amount of data, but the time taken for data read and hard disk consumption increase
accordingly.
Techniques
Measurement can be started from the head of a frame or can be started automatically from the position where a
frame error occurs, simply by changing the trigger conditions or modifying the program to be measured.
For details, refer to the Performance Analyzer Technical Reference.
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Chapter 4:
Details
4-2 Details
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Details 4-3

Performance Analyzer User Guide
Menus and Buttons
Description of menus
The pull-down menus, displayed by selecting menu items, are as follows:
File: The items in this menu are mainly used for file-related operations.
New: Create a new file for measuring and saving data.
Open: Open a previously saved file.
Close: Close the current window.
Save: Save the current file, overwriting an existing file.
Save as: Save the current file after assigning another name.
Print: Print the main graphs.
Preview: Display a preview of the main graphs as they will be printed.
Printer setup: Set up the printer.
Previously opened file: Open one of the files in the list.
Exit: Terminate the Performance Analyzer.
View: The items in this menu are used to enlarge or reduce the view size and to manipulate the cursors.
Reduce Scale: A pull-down menu for reducing the view to one of the following
sizes.
Zoom Out
x1/2
x1/4
..
x1/4096
Normal Size: Display each clock as one pixel.
Increase Scale: A pull-down menu for enlarging the view to one of the following
sizes.
Zoom In
x2
x4
x8
x16
Redraw: Refresh the screen by drawing the view again.
Go to cursor: Scroll to the cursor position.
Go to M1: Scroll to marker M1.
Go to M2: Scroll to marker M2.
Move cursor to Trigger point: Move the cursor to the trigger position.
Move V Blank point: Move to the origin.
1V blank: Move the cursor to the 1V blank point.
2V blank: Move the cursor to the 2V blank point.
3V blank: Move the cursor to the 3V blank point.
4V blank: Move the cursor to the 4V blank point.
5V blank: Move the cursor to the 5V blank point.
6V blank: Move the cursor to the 6V blank point.
7V blank: Move the cursor to the 7V blank point.
Move to Clock point: Move the cursor to a point specified in terms of clocks.
Move to Search point: Search for a point according to the set conditions and moves to
that point.
Reset M1 to cursor point: Move M1 to the most recently set cursor position.
Reset M2 to cursor point: Move M2 to the most recently set cursor position.
4-4 Details
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Reset M1 to Origin: Move M1 to the origin.
Reset M2 to Origin: Move M2 to the origin.
Tool bar: Switch the tool bar display on/off.
Status bar: Switch the status bar display on/off.
Run: The items in this menu are used to execute measurement and set up triggering.
Acquisition...: Displays a dialog box with a trigger button. Pressing the trigger
causes the sampling of data to begin immediately following the
end of the next V blank period. The data is then transferred into
the computer to be displayed. A dialog displays data transfer
status. Clicking the cancel button will abort the transfer, but any
previous data will be lost.
Read data only: Read previously sampled data.
Map Info: The items in this menu are related to the program segments and global symbol information.
Read file: Read the map file output by the linker during compilation to enable
symbolic address display.
Use Filter: Display only the global symbols obtained by filtering.
Filtering: Obtain the accessed global symbols in the section between M1
and M2.
Note: Executing “Filtering” automatically enables "Use filter".
Tools
Dump data...: Dump the data in the window in text format. (Data can also be
dumped by double-clicking the cursor position.)
Statistics...: Calculate and displays bus usage statistics for the specified range.
Video RAM viewer...: Display VRAM accesses within the specified range.
Setting: The items in this menu are used to perform setup.
Trigger Condition...: Set up the conditions that trigger the start of measurement.
Options...: Set up the environment.
IO Port Address...: Set up the IO address.
Window
New Window: Open a new window which uses the same file (data).
Cascade: Cascade the displayed windows.
Tile: Tile the displayed windows.
Arrange icon: Arrange the icons.
Help
About PA: Show title, credits, build date, and version.
Description of buttons
In addition to selecting a command from a pull-down menu, frequently used commands can also be executed
directly by clicking buttons. The button commands are displayed below the menu bar.
Details 4-5
Performance Analyzer User Guide
 Open a new file.
 Open a previously saved file.
 Save a file.
 Start printing.
 Output the version information.
 Start measurement.
 Read data.
 Set up the triggering.
 Double the view size.
 Half the view size.
 Reset the view size to 1.
 Change the view size so that the entire data for about 1V blank can be displayed.
 Change the view size so that the entire data for about 2V blank can be displayed.
 Change the view size so that the entire data for about 4V blank can be displayed.
 Search for a point according to the set conditions and moves to that point.
 Redraw the view.
 Move to the cursor position.
 Scroll to M1.
 Scroll to M2.
 Move the cursor to the trigger position.
 Move M1 to the cursor position.
 Move M2 to the cursor position.
 Dump data in the window in the text format.
 Calculate and displays the statistical amounts.
 Display VRAM accesses within the specified range.
 Switch the main RAM bus analysis display on-off.
4-6 Details
Performance Analyzer User Guide
 Switch the sub RAM bus analysis display on-off.
 Switch the video RAM analysis display on-off.
 Switch the GPU packet analysis display on-off.
 Switch the read/write penalty display on-off.
 Switch the write buffer penalty display on-off.
 Switch the polygon penalty display on-off.
 Switch the waveform display on-off.
 Switch the access display on-off.
Main Window Description
This section describes the graph items.
Names of parts
A scale is displayed at the top of each view. The figures on the scale indicate the number of clock pulses relative to
the start of measurement (positive-going of the V blank). (A red line is inserted every 1V blank.)
The measured data is displayed below the scale. Vertical color stripes in the display indicate the analyses. There
are seven analyses, those for the main RAM bus, sub bus, video RAM, GPU packet, redundant read, write buffer
and bad polygon analyses. Small, colored boxes and labels to the left of the analyses indicate the relationship
between each color and the corresponding status.
The signal waveforms are displayed below the measured data. The signal names are displayed to the left of the
waveforms. Below the signal waveforms is the access display for each segment and function, which indicate the
status of access to each symbol. The functions of these parts are described in the following sections.
Details 4-7

Performance Analyzer User Guide
Figure 4-1: Main Window
4-8 Details
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Main RAM Bus Analysis
The main RAM bus analysis displays the main RAM bus status as a histogram.
The main RAM bus status is as listed below. The area of each item corresponds to the duration it occupies the bus.
Unresolved: A pattern which cannot be analyzed.
Idle: Idle status (this does not mean that the CPU itself is idle.)
Refresh: Main RAM refresh cycle.
RAS Pre-charge: RAS pre-charge period of main RAM. (Hardware’s memory access overhead)
PIO DMA Write: DMA write cycle of PIO.
PIO DMA Read: DMA read cycle of PIO.
CD Write: Write cycle of CD.
CD Read: Read cycle of CD.
SPU DMA Write: DMA write cycle of SPU.
SPU DMA Read: DMA read cycle of SPU.
Internal DMA Write: Internal DMA write cycle (MDEC, OT clear, etc.).
Internal DMA Read: Internal DMA read cycle (MDEC, OT clear, etc.).
GPU DMA Write: DMA write cycle of GPU.
GPU DMA Read: DMA read cycle of GPU.
Data Write: Data write cycle of CPU.
Data Read: Data read cycle of CPU.
Inst Burst Read: Instruction burst read cycle of CPU.
Sub Bus Analysis
The sub bus analysis displays the sub bus status as a histogram.
The sub bus status is as listed below. The area of each item represents the time it occupies the bus.
Unresolved: A pattern which cannot be analyzed.
Idle: Idle status.
Read PIO: Read access to PIO.
Write PIO: Write access to PIO.
Read CD: Read access to CD.
Write CD: Write access to CD.
Read SPU: Read access to SPU.
Write SPU: Write access to SPU.
Read ROM: Read access to ROM.
Read Others: Read access to other devices.
Write Others: Write access to other devices.
Video RAM Analysis
The VRAM analysis displays the video RAM bus status as a histogram.
The sub bus status is as listed below. The area of each item corresponds to the amount of data that has been
transferred. Therefore, a high pattern value indicates that the data transfer rate is high.
Note: Since the CLUT transfer is identified based on the number bytes transferred in a read access, when some
other transactions with the same amount of data occur, wrong analysis may result.
Idle: Idle status.
Write: Pixel write cycle.
Read: Pixel read cycle.
Read Modify Write: Pixel read modify write (semi-transparent) cycle.
Texture Read: Texture read cycle.
Clut Read4: 4-bit (16-color) palette read cycle.
Clut Read8: 8-bit (256-color) palette read cycle.
Details 4-9

Performance Analyzer User Guide
GPU Packet Analysis
The GPU packet analysis displays the GPU packet execution status as a histogram.
The GPU packet status is as listed below. The area of each item corresponds to the number of packets. Therefore,
a high pattern value indicates that the packet transfer rate is high.
Note: The GPU packet display and the actual drawing on the video RAM bus may deviate in some points. This is
due to the presence of a packet buffer within the GPU.
None: A cycle in which the GPU packet is not processed.
Unknown: A packet which cannot be analyzed.
Command: Command packet.
Empty: Empty packet.
POLY_F3: Triangle polygon, flat.
POLY_FT3: Triangle polygon, flat texture.
POLY_G3: Triangle polygon, glow.
POLY_GT3: Triangle polygon, glow texture.
POLY_F4: Quadrangle polygon, flat.
POLY_FT4: Quadrangle polygon, flat texture.
POLY_G4: Quadrangle polygon, glow.
POLY_GT4: Quadrangle polygon, glow texture.
LINE_F2: Non-concatenated line.
LINE_G2: Non-concatenated line, with gradation.
LINE_F3: 3-point concatenated line.
LINE_G3: 3-point concatenated line, with gradation.
LINE_F4: 4-point concatenated line.
LINE_G4: 4-point concatenated line, with gradation.
SPRT: Sprite (free size).
SPRT_8: Sprite (8 x 8).
SPRT_16: Sprite (16 x 16).
TILE: Single-color tile (free size).
TILE1: Dot (1 x 1).
TILE8: Single-color tile (8 x 8).
TILE16: Single-color tile (16 x 16).
Block Fill: Block fill.
Read/Write Penalty
The read/write penalty analysis displays duplicate read accesses.
A duplicate read is recognized when the valid range (256 cycles by default) is read despite no write operation having
been performed since it was read last. The number of cycles in this range and the range of the target data area can
be set using the Option dialog box (the default data area is all of main RAM).
A typical cause of duplicate read is when data which is not assigned to a register is assigned to a stack and read
several times. But, duplicate read is also recognized when the same address has been read continuously for
polling. The area of each item corresponds to the CPU stall cycle time due to duplicate read.
None: Normal status.
Duplicate Read: Duplicate data read cycles.
Write Buffer Penalty
The write buffer penalty analysis displays the stall cycles caused by buffer flush at the instant a write cycle
completes. This analysis enables the detection of those read/write patterns which adversely affect the write buffer
efficiency. The area of each item corresponds to the CPU stall cycle time caused by write buffer flush.
4-10 Details
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Note: The areas indicated for write buffer penalty analysis do not always mean that the CPU has stalled for the
corresponding period. For details, refer to the Performance Analyzer Technical Reference.
None: Normal status.
Flush Penalty: Write buffer flush penalty.
Polygon Penalty
Polygon penalty analysis calculates and displays the wasted cycles by evaluating the pre-processing time and
redundant drawing time for each of the polygons which protruded from the frame, which have an area of 0, or
which have not been subjected to normal clipping. The default screen size and offset value for clipping are 320 x
240 and (0, 0). When the program uses different values, the new screen size and offset value should be specified in
the Option dialog box.
Note: Those penalties are estimated values and they are not accurate. Please use them as references.
None: Normal status.
Outside Frame: Polygon which is entirely outside the frame (pre-processing time + drawing
time).
Scissoring: Polygon which protrudes outside the left or top edge of the frame (redundant
drawing time).
Back Face: Back-face polygon (pre-processing time + drawing time).
Zero Area: Polygon with an area of 0 (pre-processing time only).
Waveform Display
SYSCLK: System clock.
VBLNK: V blank signal.
GUNINT*: Interrupt request from Gun.
RXD1*: Link cable signal.
DSR1*: Link cable signal.
CTS1*: Link cable signal.
Note: "*" indicates a negative logic signal.
Access Display
The following four access displays are shown in the status existing immediately before reading the map file.
The colors of the access displays correspond to those of the labels for the main RAM bus status.
<Segment accesses>
stack_seg: Access to a stack segment.
... (The segment is displayed when the map file has been read.)
unknown location: Access to a segment other than a stack.
<Global symbol accesses>
_STACK_: Access to a stack.
... (The global symbol is displayed when the map file has been read.)
unknown location: Access to a global symbol other than a stack.
Note: When the stack range is not set properly, the global symbol having the highest address may sometimes be
mistakenly identified and displayed as the stack address.
Details 4-11

Performance Analyzer User Guide
Option Setup
This section describes the dialog box used for setting the display and changing the measurement range, etc.
Option dialog box
From “Setting” menu, select "Options..." to open the Option dialog box. This dialog box is used to change or save
the display-related parameters, measurement range, etc. Clicking the OK button after changing the parameters
applies them to the current file. Clicking the “Save” button applies the changed parameters to new files that are
next created.
Figure 4-2: Option Dialog Box
Graph Display (on/off) Switch the nine graph display on-off.
(see Section 2.2.1 Switching the displayed graphs)
Data Acquisition Range: Set the range in which data is to be measured and read.
This setting is applied from the next measurement.
(see Section 3.2 Setting the Measurement Range)
Video Mode Select NTSC or PAL.
Analysis Pixel Width: Set the pixel width of the analysis showing the main RAM
bus status.
(see Section 2.2.4 Changing the analysis display and
pixel width)
4-12 Details
Performance Analyzer User Guide
Display Level of Waveform: Specify the view size with which the waveform display
should begin.
(see Section 2.2.5 Changing the display levels of the
waveform display and access display)
Display Level of Access: Specify the view size with which the access display
should begin.
(see Section 2.2.5 Changing the display levels of the
waveform display and access display)
Stack Range of a tested program: Set the stack range of the program to be measured.
(see Section 2.2.7 Setting the stack range)
Target Range of Read/Write Penalty: Set the main RAM area which becomes the target of
read/write penalty.
(see Section 4.2.6 Read/Write Penalty)
The Number of effective clock cycles: Set the number of effective clock cycles for read/write
penalty.
(see Section 4.2.6 Read/Write Penalty)
Program’s Screen Size: Set screen size for polygon penalty.
(see Section 4.2.8 Polygon Penalty)
Offset for drawing: Set offset for polygon penalty.
(see Section 4.2.8 Polygon Penalty)
Reverse the order of vertices (Back Face): Check the box if you reverse the order of vertices for
polygon penalty.
(see Section 4.2.8 Polygon Penalty)