Tools and resources for PSX reverse-engineering
; Exploring Tokimeki Memorial, a reverse-engineering project
The following is a list of tools and documents useful for analyzing, modding or translating PlayStation games. Many of them are conveniently available in Linux by a package manager like apt.

PSX file format conversion tools
CD-ROM tools
Disassemblers and decompilers
Emulators and debuggers
Documentation
Development and miscellaneous
PSX file format conversion tools
jPSXdec
Audio/video convertor which can extract PSX file formats from a disc image and build an index of file locations. Converts XA, STR, TIM.
psxsdk
Unofficial SDK for creating PlayStation games. Includes source for some conversion tools for PSX formats (ISO/BIN, WAV/VAG. TIM/BMP).
CD-ROM tools
PSXImager
Three tools: psxrip (extract files and disc metadata from BIN/CUE), psxbuild (creates a disc image), and psxinject (modify a disc image). Unfortunately doesn’t provide a build, and has difficulty with some images.
AcetoneISO
Linux tool to mount, extract and burn single-track ISO and BIN.
PowerISO
Commercial Windows/Linux CD-ROM authoring tool.
ccd2iso
Linux tool to convert IMG to ISO.
iat
Linux tool to convert various formats to ISO.
bchunk
Linux tool to convert BIN/CUE to ISO and CD audio to WAV. Supports PSX 2336-byte chunk tracks.
isoinfo
Linux tool to list contents of ISO files.
binmerge
Python script to combine a multi-track BIN/CUE into one.
Disassemblers and decompilers
Ghidra
NSA’s disassembler/decompiler, released to the public in 2019.
Radare2
Free and open-source disassembly tool.
IDA Pro
Commercial decompiler. There’s a free version but it only supports x86/64 and not MIPS (PSX). ghidra_psx_ldr
PSX executable add-on for Ghidra.
This Dust Remembers What It Once Was
Tools for aiding PSX analysis with Ghidra. Convert PSX-EXE to ELF and parse PsyQ .SYM files.
Emulators and debuggers
Mednafen
Emulator with a powerful debugger.
No$psx
PSX emulator and debugger.
ePSXe
PSX emulator.
Documentation
Nocash PSX Specifications
Description of PSX systems from the author of an emulator.
Everything You Have Always Wanted to Know about the Playstation But Were Afraid to Ask v1.1
A collection of documentation about the PSX hardware and history from 2000 (originally here).
Introduction to Hacking the Sony Playstation One
RetroReversing’s articles on the PSX.
Net Yaroze Startup Guide
Documentation for the official Net Yaroze PSX devkit.
Development and miscellaneous
Romhacking.net PSX Utilities
A list of PSX utilities for various platforms.
psx.arthus.net
A collection of PSX development resources.
PSX Links
Another collection of documentation and resources.
loveemu labo’s PSX articles
Some articles.
« Back to index page
Submit feedback • CC BY