CD Emulator
© 1998 Sony Computer Entertainment Inc.
Publication date: August 1998
Sony Computer Entertainment America
919 E. Hillsdale Blvd., 2nd floor
Foster City, CA 94404
Sony Computer Entertainment Europe
Waverley House
7-12 Noel Street
London W1V 4HH, England
The CD Emulator manual is supplied pursuant to and subject to the terms of the Sony Computer
Entertainment PlayStation® License and Development Tools Agreements, the Licensed Publisher
Agreement and/or the Licensed Developer Agreement.
The CD Emulator manual is intended for distribution to and use by only Sony Computer Entertainment
licensed Developers and Publishers in accordance with the PlayStation® License and Development Tools
Agreements, the Licensed Publisher Agreement and/or the Licensed Developer Agreement.
Unauthorized reproduction, distribution, lending, rental or disclosure to any third party, in whole or in part, of
this book is expressly prohibited by law and by the terms of the Sony Computer Entertainment
PlayStation® License and Development Tools Agreements, the Licensed Publisher Agreement and/or the
Licensed Developer Agreement.
Ownership of the physical property of the book is retained by and reserved by Sony Computer
Entertainment. Alteration to or deletion, in whole or in part, of the book, its presentation, or its contents is
prohibited.
The information in the CD Emulator manual is subject to change without notice. The content of this book is
Confidential Information of Sony Computer Entertainment.
PlayStation and PlayStation logos are registered trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. All other
trademarks are property of their respective owners and/or their licensors.
CD Emulator
Table of Contents
List of Figures iv
List of Tables iv
About This Manual v
Changes Since Last Release v
Developer Reference Series v
Typographic Conventions vi
Developer Support vi
Chapter 1: System Overview
CD Emulator Introduction 1-3
Chapter 2: Installing the System
Installing the Hardware 2-3
Diskette Contents 2-5
Binaries 2-5
CD boot files 2-6
Documentation 2-6
Samples 2-6
Installing the Software 2-7
Chapter 3: Preparing the Emulation
CDDISK Introduction 3-3
Installing the Emulator ‘Boot’ Data 3-3
Hard Drive Partitions 3-4
Creating Partitions 3-4
Setting the Active Partition 3-5
Modifying Partition Sizes 3-5
Deleting a Partition 3-5
The RCUBE Demo 3-5
Chapter 4: Generating Emulation Images
BuildCD Introduction 4-3
The Structure of a CD 4-3
BuildCD’s Output 4-3
BuildCD Parameters 4-4
Writing BuildCD Control Files 4-5
Global Commands 4-6
Outermost Level Commands 4-10
Disc Commands 4-12
Track Commands 4-17
Volume Commands 4-24
PRIMARY Volume Commands 4-27
Directory Hierarchy Commands 4-41
Directory Commands 4-52
File Commands 4-63
XA Interleaved File Commands 4-72
XA Interleaved Channel Commands 4-78
iv Table of Contents
CD Emulator
Chapter 5: Tools and Techniques for Development with the CD Emulator
.CTI File Creation 5-3
CDBoot6x.bin Usage 5-5
2MByte Emulation 5-6
CDEmuPrm Instructions 5-7
cti2cd Instructions 5-9
CutCD Version 1.0 5-10
GenCTI Instructions 5-12
MultiCD Instructions 5-14
Chapter 6: Modifying the Emulation Image
Modifying the Emulation Image-Using UPDATECD 6-3
Chapter 7: Connecting Multiple Emulation Hard Drives
Hard Drive Connections 7-3
Removing the Termination Resistors from the CD Emulator Board 7-5
Appendix A: Sample Control Files
Appendix B: ISO Character Sets
Appendix C: SCSI Errors
List of Figures
Figure 1–1: Emulator SCSI Bus Configuration 1-3
Figure 2–1: CD Emulator Board (Not all chips shown) 2-3
Figure 2–2: CD Emulator Connections 2-5
Figure 4–1: BuildCD program I/O 4-4
Figure 7–1: Emulator with Internal Hard Drive 7-3
Figure 7–2: Emulator with External Hard Drive 7-3
Figure 7–3: Emulator with Internal and External Hard Drives 7-4
Figure 7–4: Emulator with Two Internal Hard Drives 7-4
Figure 7–5: Emulator with Two External Hard Drives 7-4
Figure 7–6: Emulator Termination Resistors 7-5
Figure B–1: ISO 'd' characters (shown unshaded) B-3
Figure B–2: ISO 'a' characters (shown unshaded) B-4
List of Tables
Table 2–1: I/O Base Addresses 2-4
Table 2–2: Executables and Utilities 2-5
Table 2–3: CD Boot Files 2-6
Table 2–4: Documentation File 2-6
Table C–1: SCSI Error Definition C-3
CD Emulator
About This Manual
This manual is the latest release of instructional material relating to the CD Emulator as of Run-Time Library
Release 4.3. The purpose of this manual is to provide directions on installing and using the CD Emulator.
This CD Emulator has been designed for use exclusively with the PlayStation® Development tool
DTL-H2000/H2500. If you incorrectly install this equipment or attempt to connect it to devices other than
described herein, you may destroy this emulator and the equipment to which it is connected.
We recommend that you install the DTL-H2000/H2500, libraries and SDevTC development software first,
then familiarize yourself with how they function prior to installing the CD Emulator.
Please take a few minutes to read the "System Overview" chapter describing the emulator’s design and
function. An understanding of the system components and how they function will lead to a quicker and
easier installation.
Changes Since Last Release
This document combines the existing CD Emulator manual and the latest CD Emulator ReadMe support
document, version 1.13.2, dated 10-28-97. Most updates have gone into Chapter 5 (new): “Tools and
Techniques for Development with the CD Emulator.”
Developer Reference Series
This manual is part of the Developer Reference Series, a series of technical reference volumes covering all
aspects of PlayStation development. The complete series is listed below:
Manual Description
PlayStation Hardware Describes the PlayStation hardware architecture
and overviews its subsystems.
PlayStation Operating System Describes the PlayStation operating system and
related programming fundamentals.
Run-Time Library Overview Describes the structure and purpose of the
run-time libraries provided for PlayStation
software development.
Run-Time Library Reference Defines all available PlayStation run-time library
functions, macros and structures.
Inline Programming Reference Describes in-line programming using DMPSX,
GTE inline macro and GTE register information.
SDevTC Development Environment Describes the SDevTC (formerly "Psy-Q")
Development Environment for PlayStation
software development.
3D Graphics Tools Describes how to use the PlayStation 3D
Graphics Tools, including the animation and
material editors.
Sprite Editor Describes the Sprite Editor tool for creating
sprite data and background picture
components.
Sound Artist Tool Provides installation and operation instructions
for the DTL-H800 Sound Artist Board and
explains how to use the Sound Artist Tool
software.
File Formats Describes all native PlayStation data formats.
vi About This Manual
CD Emulator
Data Conversion Utilities Describes all available PlayStation data
conversion utilities, including both stand-alone
and plug-in programs.
CD Emulator Provides installation and operation instructions
for the CD Emulator subsystem and related
software.
CD-ROM Generator Describes how to use the CD-ROM Generator
software to write CD-R discs.
Performance Analyzer User Guide Provides general instructions for using the
Performance Analyzer software.
Performance Analyzer Technical Reference Describes how to measure software
performance and interpret the results using the
Performance Analyzer.
DTL-H2000 Installation and Operation Provides installation and operation instructions
for the DTL-H2000 Development System.
DTL-H2500/2700 Installation and Operation Provides installation and operation instructions
for the DTL-H2500/H2700 Development
Systems.
Typographic Conventions
Certain Typographic Conventions are used through out this manual to clarify the meaning of the text. The
following conventions apply to all narrative text except for structure and function descriptions:
Convention Meaning
courier Indicates literal program code.
Bold Indicates a document, chapter or section title.
The following conventions apply within structure and function descriptions only:
Convention Meaning
Medium Bold Denotes structure or function types and names.
Italic Denotes function arguments and structure members.
Developer Support
Sony Computer Entertainment America (SCEA) Sony Computer Entertainment America (SCEA)
SCEA developer support is available to licensees in North America only. You may obtain developer support
or additional copies of this documentation by contacting the following addresses:
Order Information Developer Support
In North America In North America In North America In North America
Attn: Developer Tools Coordinator E-mail: DevTech_Support@playstation.sony.com
Sony Computer Entertainment America Web: http://www.scea.sony.com/dev
919 East Hillsdale Blvd., 2nd floor Developer Support Hotline: (650) 655-8181
Foster City, CA 94404 (Call Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.,
Tel: (650) 655-8000 PST/PDT)
About This Manual vii
CD Emulator
Sony Computer Entertainment Europe (SCEE) Sony Computer Entertainment Europe (SCEE)
SCEE developer support is available to licensees in Europe only. You may obtain developer support or
additional copies of this documentation by contacting the following addresses:
Order Information Developer Support
In EuropeIn Europe In Europe In Europe In Europe In EuropeIn Europe In Europe
Attn: Production Coordinator E-mail: dev_support@playstation.co.uk
Sony Computer Entertainment Europe Web: https://www-s.playstation.co.uk
Waverley House Developer Support Hotline:
7-12 Noel Street +44 (0) 171 447 1680
London W1V 4HH (Call Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.,
Tel: +44 (0) 171 447 1600 GMT or BST/BDT)
Note: SN Systems designed and built the CD Emulator software and hardware. If you have any questions,
feel free to send them e-mail:
E-mail: support@snsys.com .
Web Site: http://www.snsys.com.
viii About This Manual
CD Emulator
CD Emulator
Chapter 1:
System Overview
1-2 System Overview
CD Emulator
System Overview 1-3
CD Emulator
CD Emulator Introduction
Once installed, the emulator will provide you, the user, with a device that mimics the functions of a real CDROM drive. Normally the command signals generated by the DTL-H2000/H2500 would go directly to a CDROM drive, which would respond and retrieve data from a CD. However, the DTL-H2000/H2500 can be
configured (under software control) to switch these command signals so that they are sent to the CD
emulator. The emulator then responds as if it were a CD-ROM drive, but in this case retrieving data from a
hard drive (HD) connected to the emulator.
This emulator consists of three (logically) different subsections:
• The emulation HD(s)
• An interface to the PC
• An interface to the ‘CD command channel’
Within the electronics of the emulator we have implemented a SCSI bus that connects each of the above
sections in the following way:
Figure 1–1: Emulator SCSI Bus Configuration
CD Command
Interpreter
Emulation
Hard Drive
Emulation
Hard Drive
PC Command
Interpreter
Device #6 (Optional) Device #7
SCSI Bus
DTL-H2000/H2500 CD
Command/Data Channel
PC Command/Data Channel
(ISA Bus)
Up to eight ‘devices’ can be connected to a SCSI bus. In this design we have used two of the eight
‘devices’ to implement command channels to and from the PC and the DTL-H2000/H2500, leaving six free
for connection to emulation HDs. We do not anticipate many users will need more that one HD. However, if
you do wish to connect more than one HD then please refer to Chapter 7.
The emulator has been designed so that either external or internal HDs can be connected: internally using
the 50 -50 ribbon connector and/or externally using the 1m cable. External connection is very simple using
the cable provided.Internal connection requires a little more work in mounting the HD in a free drive bay and
routing of the cable.
To be able to emulate a high speed CD drive a certain data transfer rate needs to be maintained between
the emulation HD and the DTL-H2000/H2500 CD command channel. We have found that some HDs
cannot maintain this data transfer rate. The manufacturers’ specifications for HDs declare an average rate
which may seem enough to satisfy the emulator’s requirements. However, most drives need to recalibrate
themselves periodically to account for thermal changes. During this period the data rate on some drives falls
1-4 System Overview
CD Emulator
off and leads to stalls in the emulation data flow. This is observed as a glitch in film playback or an
interruption in sound replay.
The following hard drives are suitable for use as CD-Emulator HDs. This list is current as of August 1997:
DCAS-34330 ULTRA SCSI 4.3GB/IBM
Fireball ST-3200S ULTRA SCSI 3.2GB/Quantum
Fireball TM-3200S ULTRA SCSI 3.2GB/Quantum
Atlas XP-4550S ULTRA SCSI 4.5GB/Quantum
Medalist ST52160N ULTRA SCSI 2GB/Seagate
Barracuda ST32171N ULTRA SCSI 2GB/Seagate
These were tested on the following PC models:
GL5200ST/DEC
GL5133ST/DEC
GXPRO6200/DELL
MILLENNIA-C/MICRON
FMV-6200T5/FUJITSU
G6-200 MALTI MEDIA/GATEWAY
P5-200/GATEWAY
Warning: The list above is not comprehensive, and does not include data about whether a DTL-H2500 or Warning:
DTL-H2000 was used in the test. Therefore, if you have a DTL-H2500 board, please don't run out and buy
a Gateway or a Micron, because these have had problems with DTL-H2500 software in the past.
Now that you have a basic understanding of the system the next thing to do is get it installed and working.
The following chapter describes the following installation steps:
• Configuring your emulator board.
• Plugging the card into the PC.
• Connecting the emulation HD.
• Connecting the emulator to the DTL-H2000/H2500.
• Installing the software.
• Setting up the emulation HD to be ready for image building and emulation.
• Building and testing the example program.
Once these steps are complete, the CD emulator is ready for use.
CD Emulator
Chapter 2:
Installing the System
2-2 Installing the System
CD Emulator
Installing the System 2-3
CD Emulator
Installing the Hardware
 Follow the steps below to install the CD Emulator Board. Turn off your PC and disconnect it from the
power supply. Remove the cover and check all the cards in your system, noting their base addresses, irq
settings and dma channel usage. Determine which channels/addresses are free to set the jumpers on the
emulator board appropriately.
Figure 2–1: CD Emulator Board (Not all chips shown)
J3
J2
J1 J4
C2
C3
C1
J5
CAUTION: This board is sensitive to static electricity; hold by the metal support bracket when handling it.
The Connectors
C1 External SCSI connector
C2 CD command channel (connects to DTL-H2000/H2500)
C3 Internal SCSI connector
The Jumpers
J1 & J2 DMA channel select (both must be set the same).
Possible settings are (from left to right) 7, 6 or 5.
J3 Interrupt request setting. Possible settings are (from left to right) 15, 12, 11, 10, 7 or 5.
J4 I/O base address select. Possible settings are (from left to right)
300, 308, 310, 318, 380, 390, or 398.
J5 SCSI ID device number (also software selectable). Possible settings are from 7 - 0. This is a 3 bit binary selection. With the
top two jumpers closed, the ID will be 6.
1. Set and confirm the emulator board I/O, DMA, and IRQ jumpers.
The default settings have been chosen so that the possibility of contention with other internal boards is
minimized. Nevertheless, care should be taken that settings on the CD emulator board do not conflict with
any other cards in your system.
The factory default setting for the I/O base address is 308 (decimal notation), which also happens to be the
default setting of the DTL-H2000. 308 is 134 in hexadecimal notation, which actually corresponds to the
hexadecimal address of 1340. This odd notation conversion scheme is explained by the following: although
2-4 Installing the System
CD Emulator
the emulator board’s actual address is in 4 byte hexadecimals, the DIP switch host’s A15 - A4 (3 bytes) are
in decimal format. The actual addresses and a table of their equivalents are entered below:
Table 2–1: I/O Base Addresses
Decimal Decimal Hex Decimal Hex Actual Remarks Actual Remarks
Notation Notation Notation Notation Notation Address Address
(in hex) (in hex)
300 0x12C 0x12C0
308 0x134 308 0x134 0x1340 Default Default
310 0x136 0x1360
318 0x13E 0x13E0
380 0x17C 0x17C0
388 0x184 0x1840
390 0x186 0x1860
398 0x18E 0x18E0
In this case, take A15-A4 from 0x1340 and match it with 0x134 to get “308”.
You must also set the DMA channel jumpers. The numbers 5 and 7 on the board can sometimes be printed
in reverse, so be careful --- the jumper to the farthest left is 7.
Finally, set the interrupt level jumper J3; the factory default is 15.
J5, the SCSI ID device number setting, comes set to 7 (all three jumpers connected). This is the PC
command channel device number. See Fig 1-1. Note: this setting is also configurable from the command
line.
2. Install the emulation board in the PC/AT Interchanger ISA Bus expansion slot. Insert the emulation board 2. Install the emulation board in the PC/AT Interchanger ISA Bus expansion slot.
into an available ISA slot next to the DTL-H2000 PIO board or the DTL-H2500 board. As shown in Figure 2-
2, connect C2 to the similar socket on the top edge of the PIO board, using the flat connection cable
provided. Since the emulation board and the development CD-ROM (either the DTL-H2010 or the DTLH2510) are able to coexist, there is no need to detach the CD-ROM drive.
3. Connect the emulator-dedicated HD to the emulator board. Both internal and external connection 3. Connect the emulator-dedicated HD to the emulator board.
methods are possible. As of October, 1997, we recommend the Micropolis 4110AV, the IBM Spitfire (0662),
or the IBM Pegasus. The IBM drives require that the auto start jumper be set prior to use.
If you intend to use an internal HD with the emulator, mount it in a free bay. Connect it to the emulator
board using the large ribbon cable provided (connector C3). Normally there is a free power connector for
extra drives within the PC. Connect it to the power socket of the HD. Note the SCSI ID setting of the drive.
You will need this later. Refer to manufacturer’s instructions on how to set this.
Replace the cover on the PC.
If you are using an external drive, connect it now.
NOTE: Never connect or disconnect any hard drives without first removing all sources of power.
Installing the System 2-5
CD Emulator
Figure 2–2: CD Emulator Connections
CD Emulator Board
PIO Board
CPU Board
To Internal Emulation Hard Drive
To External Emulation Hard Drive
} DTL-H2000/H2500
Diskette Contents
A brief description of the contents of your diskette appears in the sections below. Files have been zipped
with sub-directories. Use pkunzip -d <file> version 2.04g or the latest version of WinZip to unzip the files.
Binaries
The following CD-emulation executables and utilities provided by SN Systems appear in the directory
cdemu\bin on your diskette. cdemu\bin
Table 2–2: Executables and Utilities
File Version Description
bcdflat.exe 2.41 BETA version of flat model for buildcd.
buildcd.exe 2.41 Build image program
ccs2cti.exe 1.10 CCS (cdgen output) to CTI file converter.
Cdbios.com 1.04 Emulator board communication driver.
2-6 Installing the System
CD Emulator
Cddisk.exe 1.17 Emulator HD disk utility
cdemuprm.exe 1.00 Allows you to select normal or zero seek timings; and also
control errors within CD streams. Both settings are unaffected
by RESETPS (which causes the CD emulator's micro
controller to reload CDBOOT from the SCSI HD). Requires at least
CDBOOT35/CDBOOT65.
cdmon.com 1.03 TSR program for debugging.
cti2cd.exe 1.03 beta Bug fix for Yamaha audio track cutting.
Cutcd.exe 1.02 beta YAM CDR100/SONY CDW900E cutter utility from CD
emulator image.
Gencti.exe 1.0 beta GenCTI generates a ".cti" file based on the directory structure
on your PC.
dos4gw.exe 1.97 Dos extender (for bcdflat)
multicd.exe 1.01 Multi CD emulator Utility. Allows simulation of CD emulator
image changing and door opening.
updatecd.exe 1.18 Update the build image utility.
CD boot files
Boot files are binary files that contain the initialization routines for the CD-emulator to use on start up. You
install them whenever you need to format the CD-emulator dedicated hard-drive. For instructions on
updating your files, read the section "CDBIN3x updates" in this document.
Note: If you install version 3.x of the boot code then no information will be passed back to the PC but you Note:
do not need to worry about the interrupt at all.
Table 2–3: CD Boot Files
File Version Description
CDBOOT36.bin 3.6 Emulator Boot code.
CDNOSK3x.bin DELETED For old timers: The reason there is no CDNOSK3x.BIN any
more is that, with the advent of version CDBOOT3.6, the seek
timings are now programmable using the utility called
CDEMUPRM.
cdboot66.bin 6.6 Emulator Boot code, identical to version 36.bin, except that
version 6.6 reports information back to the PC so that the PC
can show the current CD activity on screen. This is achieved
with the use of the CDMON.COM TSR.
Documentation
The following file appears on your diskette in the directory CDEMU\DOC. CDEMU\DOC.
Table 2–4: Documentation File
File Version Description
cdemul.pdf - CD Emulator Manual
Samples
CDEMU\Sample\Basic. This tutorial is a very basic overview of how to use the CD-Emulator. Compiles with CDEMU\Sample\Basic.
Library 4.0 and later; it may also compile with earlier versions of the library.
Installing the System 2-7
CD Emulator
CDEMU\Sample\Rcube. This is an example that you can use on your emulator. This is the standard sample CDEMU\Sample\Rcube.
provided by SN Systems. You cannot compile this sample, as source code was not provided.
CDEMU\Sample\GenCti. This sample directory contains a sample "Test.cti" output file from the "GenCTI" CDEMU\Sample\GenCti.
program. Refer to the "GenCTI" instructions in the "readme.doc" of this distribution for more details on the
syntax of GenCTI.
Please note that "GenCTI" was never updated beyond 1.0beta. For more details on the CTI syntax, refer to
the CD Emulator manual.
Installing the Software
Install the software. Copy the CD emulator software on the diskette to your computer. We recommend Install the software.
copying the files to c:\ps\psx\cdemu.
DEXBIOS.COM is a driver which you will be familiar with. It allows the code development system to
communicate with the DTL-H2000. In the same way, H25BIOS.COM allows communication with the DTLH2500. Similarly, we have provided CDBIOS.COM to provide communication services to the CD emulator
(in addition to DEXBIOS.COM or H25BIOS.COM, not as a replacement). Modify the autoexec.bat Modify the autoexec.bat Modify the autoexec.bat file to
load CDBIOS.COM. Your autoexec.bat file should contain the line listed below. .
[full path to "cdbios.com"]\cdbios /aXXX /iXX /dXX
where
aXXXX refers to I/O base address select on the CD-Emulator board. Possible settings are (from aXXXX
left to right) 300, 308, 310, 318, 380, 388, 390, or 398. Refer to the table in Step 1 of Installing
the Hardware for the actual addresses to which these correspond.
iXX refers to Interrupt request settings on the CD emulator board. Possible settings are (from left iXX
to right) 15, 12, 11, 10, 7, and 5.
dXX refers to DMA channel selects on the board. Possible settings are (from left to right) 7, 6 or dXX
5.
For example,
c:\ps\psx\cdemu\bin\cdbios /a398 /i11 /d5
IMPORTANT. Care should be taken that the settings on the CD emulator board do not conflict with any IMPORTANT. Care should be taken that the settings on the CD emulator board do not conflict with any
other cards in the system. For example, other cards in the system. CDBIOS.COM must be installed at a different address from a
previously installed DEXBIOS.COM or H25BIOS.COM. The interrupt you choose should be used exclusively
for the emulator.
Modify your path variable. Edit your autoexec.bat file to contain the path to the CD-emulator binaries. For Modify your path variable.
example, you could add the line
set path=c:\ps\psx\cdemu\bin;%path%
if the CD-emulator binaries are in c:\ps\psx\cdemu\bin.
Reboot your machine. Make sure that the CD emulator board is connected to either an external or internal Reboot your machine
hard drive. Power on the external hard drive, if any, BEFORE powering on the PC.
Open up a DOS-console box and run the appropriate driver for your development boards. Run Open up a DOS-console box and run the appropriate driver for your development boards.
DEXBIOS.COM (DTL-H2000 ISA boards) or H25BIOS.COM (DTL-H2500 PCI boards) as usual, by typing in
"dexbios /aXXXX /iXXX" or "h25bios /aXXXX /iXXX". Refer to the DTL-H2000 or DTL-H2500 manuals for
more details.
2-8 Installing the System
CD Emulator
CD Emulator
Chapter 3:
Preparing the Emulation
3-2 Preparing the Emulation
CD Emulator
Preparing the Emulation 3-3
CD Emulator
CDDISK Introduction
CDDisk is the general emulation disk manager program. It performs the following functions:
• Initialization of the HD
• Installation of the emulator board ‘emulation program’
• Partitioning of the HD(s) into pseudo ‘Cds’
• Setting the ‘active’ partition.
It operates in one of two modes, direct command line actions or menu mode and takes the general
command line form
CDDISK [option] [disk SCSI ID]
Valid options are
-a<part_id> Set the active partition (no menus).
-b<filename> (Re)Install the emulation program (no menus).
-n Disk is new. Initialize the partition sector.
where
‘disk SCSI ID’ is the ID number set on the emulation HD.
Generally HDs are shipped with an ID of zero and can be plugged without change into the emulator board.
However, when using more than one HD, special installation instructions need to be followed (see Chapter
6) and the ID of each one must be different from each of the other ‘devices’ on the local SCSI bus.
(Free IDs are 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5)
For the following examples it will be assumed that the HD has an ID of 0.
When the system is first installed, or a new HD is added, it must be initialized with the following:
CDDISK -n 0
This places the disk into a known state ready to accept emulation images. The user will then be asked to
confirm this action because ALL information previously written on it will be destroyed.
Installing the Emulator ‘Boot’ Data
The ‘cd command/data device’ will, upon reset, make contact with each device on the bus in turn from
device 0 to device 7. It is looking to identify an emulation HD.Once found, it then looks for a ‘boot’ partition
on that device. Data in this (small) partition is then loaded into the emulation card. This is the emulation
program that interprets the signals coming from the DTL-H2000/H2500. Booting in this way allows for
future upgrades to the emulation system should they be necessary.
Only one of these ‘boot’ partitions needs to exist in multiple HD configurations, and it is recommended that
it be placed onto the HD with the lowest SCSI ID.
NOTE: Without this ‘boot’ partition in place, the emulator CANNOT function.
Assuming the emulator software was installed as described above, then to install the ‘boot’ program
directly:
CDDISK -bC:\PS\PSX\CDEMU\BIN\CDBOOTxx.BIN 0
If this command was completed successfully, it will return without errors.
To install the boot program using the menu system:
3-4 Preparing the Emulation
CD Emulator
CDDISK 0
Please select the ‘Load Boot Program’ option from the menu.
Type in the full pathname to the file CDBOOTxx.BIN
e.g. C:\ PS\PSX\CDEMU\BIN\CDBOOTxx.BIN
If all is well, no errors will be reported.
You only need to do this once, unless you receive updates of cdbootxx.bin.
If you need to update a previously existing boot file, either use the 'Load boot program' option from CDDisk,
or perform the following steps:
1: Launch cdbios: cdbios /a<address> /I<interrupt> /d<dma channel>. For example, 1:
cdbios /a398 /i5 /d7
2: IfDEXBIOS or H25BIOS are running, then stop the emulation, which is necessary since the emulator
hogs the SCSI drive. Do this by typing the following commands:
RESETPS 1 (allows DEX target to be selected)
RUN SelCD (suspends emulation)
3: Install new CDBOOT using CDDISK. 3:
CDDISK -bCDBOOTxx.BIN <SCSI id>
where "xx" is the version number, and where SCSI id is the SCSI id number of the emulator HD.
4: IfDEXBIOS or H25BIOS are running, then restart the emulation:
RESETPS 1 (forces emulator to load new CDBOOT code from SCSI drive)
RUN SelEmu (restarts emulation)
Hard Drive Partitions
Creating Partitions
A partition on the emulation HD is effectively a pseudo CD. It is not limited to being a standard CD size of 72
minutes for example but can be any size. This provides flexibility for the developer who may only require an
effective 10 minute CD but wishes to have 5 versions on one CD of up to 99 minutes. (There is little point in
defining a partition larger than this because the CD directory structure does not cater to it.)
Partitions can be defined in units of either MBytes, Frames (CD frames) or Sectors.
One Frame is 5 sectors (allowing for extra information needed for emulation). There are 75 frames per
second. From this information you can calculate the size of partition you require.
For example, a 60 minute CD will require a partition size of 270,000 frames or 1,350,000 sectors or 660
MBytes.
To create the first partition on disk 0, use
CDDISK 0
Please select the ‘Create Partition’ option from the menu.
Select the size type you wish to define this partition in. 1 for sectors, 2 for MBytes and 3 for frames. We will
define this one in frames, so enter 3 and then type in the size. For this example we will define a 60 minute
CD needing 270,000 frames.
To allow for easy identification you will now need to provide a partition name.
Preparing the Emulation 3-5
CD Emulator
e.g. 60 Min CD.
You will now see this added to the list. Partition 0 is the boot partition and partition 1 is 60 Min CD.
Setting the Active Partition
The act of creating the above partition has made this the currently active partition. This means that when
the DTL-H2000/H2500 issues CD commands it is from currently active partition that the data is read. Only
one partition on each HD can be marked active at any one time. This can be viewed as being equivalent to
inserting a real CD into a drive.
If you have more than one HD, the active partition on the HD with the lowest number ID will be considered
as the current partition. Activating partition 0 (the boot one) effectively deselects all partitions on an HD.
To set an active partition - e.g. Disk 0 partition 1,
CDDISK -a1 0
or
CDDISK 0
and select the ‘Select active partition’ option from the menu and type 1.
You will notice that the currently active partition is indicated in red.
Modifying Partition Sizes
Partition sizes can be modified only through the option menus. Select the partition you wish to resize and
enter the new size (only in sectors!).
NOTE: Resizing a non-active partition will NOT set it as the active partition.
Deleting a Partition
Select the partition number of the partition you wish to delete and confirm the action.
The RCUBE Demo
Build the image of the RCUBE demo executable onto the hard drive. The following steps will install the Build the image of the RCUBE demo executable onto the hard drive.
RCUBE demo included on your diskette. We assume the CD emulator board has these settings: RCUBE demo
I/O addr = 0x390
IRQ = 5
DMA = 7
SCSI ID of connected internal or external HD = 4.
At an MS-DOS command window, type
cd c:\ps\psx\cdemu\sample\rcube
buildcd -mcd.map cd.cti -s4:1
where
cd.cti = the RCUBE demo cti file included on your diskette
-m = option that enables map file output. In this example, the output is "cd.map"
-s4:1 = option that forces the image to be output to SCSI device at SCSI "4" in partition "1".
buildcd will run in the MS-DOS window. Ignore the warning message #66. When buildcd finishes
successfully, exit the program by hitting ESC on the keyboard. The result of buildcd is an image of the
3-6 Preparing the Emulation
CD Emulator
CD-ROM on the emulator hard disk. The generated image is an ISO-9660 formatted MODE 1 CDROM, and
the files PSX.EXE, RCUBE.EXE, RCUBE.TIM, and RCUBE.TMD are on Track 1.
Run the RCUBE demo. After building the image onto the CD drive, you may now execute the program. Run the RCUBE demo.
These steps can be used to launch your examples. You should already have H25BIOS.COM or
DEXBIOS.COM running as a TSR in the background.
resetps 1
pause
run <dir>:\psyq\bin\snpatch Warning: this is only for DTL-H2000 boards!
pause
run <dir>:\psyq\bin\selemu
This command instructs the DTL-H2000 to boot up from the CD-Emulation HD. (To instruct the DTL-H2000
or the DTL-H2500 to boot up from the CD-ROM unit, execute run c:\psx\bin\selcd. The selemu
utility needs to be executed prior to first emulation session. It doesn't need to be executed before every
emulation session, as long as selemu has been executed once before.)
Now you are ready to launch the program:
pause
run <dir>:\pssn\bin\cdexec
You should notice the green LED flashing on your attached emulation HD. After a long interval the colorbars
on your NTSC monitor disappear and the RCUBES demo appears on screen.
To quit this program, you must press the rectangular button.
If a program does not start, ensure that you have quit a previously running program. You may also type
RESETPS 1 at any time to reset the ISA boards and the CD emulator board.
Controller button naming conventions:
The PlayStation controller has 14 buttons arranged, as follows:
Lpad: Left pad (left set of four buttons, located on top of controller, similar to D-PAD)
Rpad: Right pad (right set of four buttons, located on top of controller, four circular buttons)
Lflip: Left side (set of two flipper buttons on the left side)
Rflip: Right side (set of two flipper buttons on the right side)
Select: Rectangular button (located on top between Lpad and Rpad)
Start: Triangular button (located on top between Lpad and Rpad)
RCUBE: 3D Texture map, transparency, lighting example
Rpad Left: Toggle between black background and fog effect
Rpad Up: Toggle between texture maps, lighting effects, etc.
Lpad: Rotation
LFlip: Explode cubes
RFlip: Reset cubes
CD Emulator
Chapter 4:
Generating Emulation Images
4-2 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
Generating Emulation Images 4-3
CD Emulator
BuildCD Introduction
BuildCD is a program to create CD emulator images and ISO9660 files. It takes source files at various levels,
automatically generates directory and marker information and generates the relevant subcode information.
The program requires users to have a reasonably good idea of the structure of a CD, as the control
language is quite low-level. The command set is structured to force users to work in a manner consistent
with CD structure.
Central to the running of the BuildCD program is the concept of the control file. This defines the order and
structure of the intended Compact Disc and directs the program as to the outputs it should produce.
The Structure of a CD
A CD is arranged as a continuous anti-clockwise spiral of data leading out from the centre of the Compact
Disc. The smallest logical division of this spiral is a frame, this being the amount of data required for 1/75th
of a second’s playback. A frame contains 2352 bytes of data and 98 bytes of subcode.
The CD spiral is divided logically into tracks. The track nearest to the centre is called the leadin track. It is
followed by a number of data tracks (up to 99) and the they are then followed by a leadout track. The leadin
contains the CD’s table of contents stored in the subcode (which is what a CD player spins up and reads
when a new CD is put in). The table of contents details the positions of all the tracks on the disc in terms of
time offset from the start of the disc. BuildCD automatically generates a table of contents. The last track,
the leadout track, is just a marker to flag the end of the disc. Neither the leadin nor leadout track should
have any data in it.
All tracks other than the leadin and leadout tracks can be used freely for holding data. They can be
standard audio tracks or can hold data in a variety of Modes.
Mode0 frames can only hold empty records.
Mode1 frames can hold up to 2048 bytes of data and automatically include cyclic redundancy checks and
error correction. For critical data where data integrity has to be maintained (such as executable programs),
Mode1 should always be used.
Mode2 frames can hold up to 2336 bytes of data but afford no cyclic redundancy checks or error
correction. For non-critical data where data integrity needed not be worried about too much (such as
graphics), Mode2 frames can be used.
XA frames are a modification of the Mode2 frame standard and allow two types of data records that can be
freely interleaved.
Form1 mirrors Mode1 in that it can hold up to 2048 bytes of data and automatically include cyclic
redundancy checks and error correction.
Form2 mirrors Mode2 in that it can hold up to 2324 bytes of data without error correction.
BuildCD’s Output
BuildCD takes a control file as primary input, pulling all specified files as and when required. The outputs
from this program are all for specific purposes, as detailed below. None of the outputs will be produced
without the correct command line switch being present when the executable is invoked. The inputs and
outputs for the BuildCD program can be viewed as:
4-4 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
Figure 4–1: BuildCD program I/O
Control File
Source Files
Subcode Files
Volume Header Files
Track File
Text Map File
Image File
Binary Map File
Part Files
BuildCD
SCSI Device Image
Image File An image file is a complete representation of all CD data. This is the final output of
the BuildCD program and can be used for future cutting onto disc via a CD writer.
SCSI Device Image An image file can be written automatically to the SCSI drive resident in the CD
emulator. Written as a SCSI device image, it can be used by the CD emulator
directly.
Track File A track file is a representation of an ISO9660 volume. This type of file output can
be written directly into a data track. However if any of its contents were to change,
it would have to be recreated.
Text Map File A text map file is a textual representation of what has gone into the image file. This
can be used by the UpdateCD program to check the source file datetimes and
sizes to ensure that the image is up-to-date, and on finding any out-of-date
sections, automatically updating the relevant files. A text map file will only be
written if an entire image is being created.
Binary Map File The Binary Map File is a binary representation of the image, specifying where the
source files and part files of the image can be found. This file is for use by the
Software and Hardware emulators to build images on the fly.
Part Files The part files are automatically generated sections of track files that have to be
created (rather than the source files that are already resident on disk). In fact,
these are binary representations of the CD Directories, PathTables and Volume
headers. These part files are for use in conjunction with the Binary Map File.
Flagging the output of the Binary Map File will automatically cause the creation of
the part files.
SonyCD Generator The CD generator save files can be used by Sony's CD Generator program to
Save Files import the CD specification creation of CDs prior to direct writing from within the
BuildCD program.
Interleaved Interleaved output files are in the same format as those files imported using an
Output Files XASource command within the control file command language. Interleaved files
are produced only when a -g command line argument is used and the output
filename is specified in the XAInterleavedFile control file command.
BuildCD Parameters
BuildCD has the following parameter structure:
BuildCD [options] [[[d:]path]control_filename.ext]
Generating Emulation Images 4-5
CD Emulator
As is normal for DOS, options are distinguished from normal parameters by being preceded by either a “-”
or “/” character. The options available to the BuildCD program are detailed on the help screen which is
displayed whenever the program is invoked without any parameters. The valid parameters are:
-1 Ensures that all file and directory names on the CD are checked for being ISO level
1.
-2 Ensures that all file and directory names on the CD are checked for being ISO level
2.
-b[<FileName>] Enables the output of any Binary Map File specified within the Control File.
-d<var>=<var> Predefines a string substitution to be used upon the Control File.
-e<num> Restricts the number of error messages output.
-g[<FileName>] Enables the output of Sony CDGenerator save files and enables output of
InterleavedFile file output.
-i[<FileName>] Enables the output of the Image File.
-m[<FileName>] Enables the output of any Text Map File specified within the Control File.
-p[<dir>] Causes output of Part Files. If a directory is specified then they will be output
there. The Part Files will be automatically output if Binary Map File output is
enabled.
-s<s_id>:<p_id> Causes output of the image to a SCSI device. s_id is the SCSI ID and the p_id is
the partition ID.
-t[<FileName>] Enables the output of Track Files.
-w Suppresses all warning messages.
Writing BuildCD Control Files
It should be noted that the structure of the control file is dependent on the level at which the command is
being specified. There is a hierarchy of levels into which the program descends and from which it then rises.
The easiest way to see how a control file has to be specified is to look at the examples in Appendix A.
These examples show all the allowable commands at least once and also show the two entry points to the
command sets.
It should be noted that all commands are case insensitive, i.e. the case of the command is ignored although
error messages do faithfully echo the case of characters within the control file.
BuildCD has been written to run in conjunction with UpdateCD, a program that works from the Text Map
File to ensure that the contents of the image and all other output files are still up-to-date. UpdateCD cannot
move internal image file structures around. If it had to do this, the increase in size of a source file at the start
of the image would cause a ripple effect that would take longer than writing the image from scratch.
UpdateCD will simply inform the user that the source file has outgrown its allotted area, and stop before
writing anything. An image can however be written with extra space to allow for this eventuality, using the
MinLength and AddLength commands at the File Command level. If a file is likely to grow, then it is
suggested that these commands be used.
Another ‘trick’ that has been used by developers takes place when they know in advance that more files
than exist at the moment are going to be required. The incorrect solution adopted has been to build an
image with the ‘vapour’ files being sourced from existing files, in the hope that the source for these files can
be later swapped. Unfortunately this would cause an inconsistency with the existing control file and
therefore is not allowed. The correct way to prepare for the future source files is to create dummy files,
potentially even empty files, and again use the MinLength and AddLength functions to ensure that there is
enough space for the eventual files to reside in. When the files have been created they need only be copied
over the dummy files for the UpdateCD program to correctly load them.
4-6 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
Global Commands
Global commands are valid at any point in the control file. They fall into the following categories:
Defining of default values and substitution strings. Define, GreenwichOffset
Status message output during program execution. Echo, ShowDefines
File inclusion. Include
Generating Emulation Images 4-7
CD Emulator
Define
Function
Defines substitution variables for replacement within the control file(s)
Syntax
Define <var> <value> [<var> <value> [...]]
Default
BuildCD has the following predefined variables:
program Executing program name
version Current program version number
edition Current program edition number
second Present DOS second of minute
minute Present DOS minute of hour
hour Present DOS hour of day (24hr clock)
day Present DOS day of month
month Present DOS month of year
year Present DOS year
weekday Present DOS day of the week
(Monday = 1, ... , Sunday = 7)
yearday Present DOS day of the year
Remarks
All strings enclosed within square braces in the control file will be substituted for the values previously
defined. If a substitution is attempted for a variable that is undefined then an error will be output.
Substitutions are not recursive, nor can they be nested. When the program encounters a replacement
string it looks for the first closing square brace and then attempts to match all characters between. Matches
are case insensitive. Once matched, the string and the square braces are replaced by the defined
replacement string.
There is no limit (barring memory limitations) to the number of strings that can be defined or the number of
substitutions allowable in a single line.
Substitution strings can also be defined in the command line using the -d option.
Substitution strings can be redefined at any point, to effectively undefine a string, it has to be redefined to a
null string. For example:
Define PsyQ “”
Example
Define PsyQ c:\psyq\bin
See also: Command line arguments
4-8 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
Echo
Function
Outputs all arguments to the Echo window of the output screen.
Syntax
Echo <argument1> [...]
Remarks
All arguments are echoed to the appropriate output window. Output is not buffered.
All substitutions will have been performed before output.
All comments are ignored.
Example
Define PsyQ c:\psyq\bin
Echo PsyQ var = [PsyQ]
would output the string:
PsyQ var = c:\psyq\bin
GreenwichOffset
Function
Sets the default Greenwich offset which is to be used whenever a date is specified without an explicit value.
Syntax
GreenwichOffset <OffsetValue>
Default
The Greenwich offset defaults to a value of 0.
Remarks
The Greenwich offset is a value defined within the ISO9660 document. Basically, it is a time offset from
Greenwich Mean Time based on the number of 15 minute intervals that the author’s time zone is from
London. Greenwich offsets range from -48 (west) to 52 (east).
Typical examples are:
New York -20
Tokyo 32
Example
GreenwichOffset -15
Generating Emulation Images 4-9
CD Emulator
Include
Function
Includes the contents of the specified file into the control file at the specified point.
Syntax
Include <FileName>
Remarks
Include files can be nested. There is no imposed limit to the number of nested include files, stack space and
memory allowing.
Example
Include psyqgame.cti
ShowDefines
Function
Outputs details of all defined substitution strings to the Echo window of the output screen.
Syntax
ShowDefines
Remarks
All defined substitution strings are output to the window whether they are defined in the control file, defined
in the invocation arguments or predefined within the program. Output is not buffered.
Example
Define PsyQ c:\psyq\bin
ShowDefines
would result in a typical output of:
version 1.00
edition 1.00
program C:\PSYQ\BIN\BUILDCD.EXE
second 23
minute 02
hour 15
day 27
month 07
year 1994
weekday 03
yearday 208
PsyQ c:\psyq\bin
See also: Define
4-10 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
Outermost Level Commands
Outermost level commands are the highest level of command for a control file. Only global commands can
be recognized before an outermost level command.
There are two outermost level commands Disc and Volume. The Volume command at this level is identical
to the Volume command at the track level of a disc definition.
Generating Emulation Images 4-11
CD Emulator
Disc
Function
Marks the start of the definition of a disc and defines the primary output file for the program.
Syntax
Disc <DiscType> [<ImageFileName>]
Remarks
Valid disc types are:
CDDA, CDAUDIO or AUDIO Audio discs
CDROM or ROM Data and audio discs
CDROMXA or XA CDROM XA discs
CDROMXA_PSX or XA_PSX Standard XA discs with PSX restrictions and extensions
The Disc statement specifies the default image output file name. No image file will be written unless the -i
command line parameter is used when the program is invoked. Any image file name specified in the
command line will override this image file name if specified.
For a PSX_XA disc there are certain restrictions on the general XA format. Most notably:
• The hierarchy path tables must all appear and be in a fixed order
• Volume descriptors can only be written once
• Only primary and termination volume descriptors can be defined
• System identifier must be PLAYSTATION
• SubSource definitions cannot be made
• No Mode1 track can appear within the image
The Disc statement enables the Disc commands until an EndDisc statement is encountered.
Example
Disc CDROM state.qmu
Volume
Function
Marks the start of the definition of a track volume and defines the primary output file for it.
Syntax
Volume <VolumeType> [<TrackFileName>]
Remarks
The Volume statement specifies the default track output file name. No track file will be written unless the -t
command line parameter is used when the program is invoked. Any track file name specified in the
command line will override this track file name if specified.
The only valid volume type is ISO9660.
The Volume statement enables the Volume commands until an EndVolume statement is encountered.
Example
Volume ISO9660 psyqtrk.trk
4-12 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
Disc Commands
Disc commands define the highest level of disc structure. They fall into the following categories:
Defining the position of tracks within the disc. LeadIn, Track, LeadOut
Disc specific definitions. CatalogNumber, MapFile, CDGeneratorFile
Disc specific checks. CDSize
Disc definition termination. EndDisc
Generating Emulation Images 4-13
CD Emulator
CatalogNumber
Function
Allows for the definition of the CD catalog number that describes the disc and appears in the Q subcode
channel.
Syntax
CatalogNumber <Number>
Remarks
If no catalog number is defined then it will not be included within the disc’s Q subcode channel. The catalog
number can be up to 13 digits long, if it is less than this the leading digits will be padded with zeros.
Example
CatalogNumber 622345
CDGeneratorFile
Function
Specifies the name of the default Sony CDGenerator output save file.
Syntax
CDGeneratorFile <FileName>
Remarks
No file will be written unless the -g command line parameter is used when the program is invoked. Any
CDGenerator file name specified in the command line will override this file name.
Example
CDGeneratorFile c:\devel\outcdg.ccs
CDSize
Function
Specifies the size of the target CD in minutes.
Syntax
CDSize <NumMinutes>
Default
The CDSize defaults to the standard CD length of 74 minutes.
Remarks
The value specified by this command is used to test for CD overflow. This command can be used to adjust
the checked length of the CD. The input value is not checked against any specific criterion except for being
a valid positive integer.
Example
CDSize 20
4-14 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
EndDisc
Function
Marks the end of the disc definition.
Syntax
EndDisc
Remarks
The EndDisc statement should be the last statement in any control file. Only at the end of the control file will
the image be built.
Example
EndDisc
LeadIn
Function
Marks the start of a leadin track definition.
Syntax
LeadIn <TrackType>
Remarks
Valid track types are:
CDDA, CDAUDIO or AUDIO Audio track
Mode0, Data0, ROM0 or CDROM0 Mode0 data track
Mode1, Data1, ROM1 or CDROM1 Mode1 data track
Mode2, Data2, ROM2 or CDROM2 Mode2 data track
Each disc has one leadin track that must be the first track defined. The leadin track contains the disc’s table
of contents (TOC) in the Q subcode channel. It is generally expected that the data portion of the track
contains nothing but zeros. A minimum of length of 150 frames is allowable, although 500 is recommended
as a minimum and upwards of 1500 is usual. The LeadIn statement enables track commands until an
EndTrack statement is encountered.
Example
LeadIn Mode0
See also: EndTrack, Empty
Generating Emulation Images 4-15
CD Emulator
LeadOut
Function
Marks the start of a leadout track definition.
Syntax
LeadOut <TrackType>
Remarks
Valid track types are:
CDDA, CDAUDIO or AUDIO Audio track
Mode0, Data0, ROM0 or CDROM0 Mode0 data track
Mode1, Data1, ROM1 or CDROM1 Mode1 data track
Mode2, Data2, ROM2 or CDROM2 Mode2 data track
Each disc has one leadout track that must be the last track defined. The leadout track contains a disc end
marker in the Q subcode channel. It is generally expected that the data portion of the track contains
nothing but zeros.
A minimum of length of 150 frames is allowable, although 500 is recommended as a minimum.
The LeadOut statement enables track commands until an EndTrack statement is encountered.
Example
LeadOut Mode0
See also: EndTrack, Empty
MapFile
Function
Specifies the name of the default text map file.
Syntax
MapFile <FileName>
Remarks
No map file will be written unless the -m command line parameter is used when the program is invoked.
Any text map file name specified in the command line will override this map file name.
Example
MapFile c:\devel\outmap.txt
4-16 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
Track
Function
Marks the start of a standard track definition.
Syntax
Track <TrackType>
Remarks
Valid track types are:
CDDA, CDAUDIO or AUDIO Audio track
Mode0, Data0, ROM0 or CDROM0 Mode0 data track
Mode1, Data1, ROM1 or CDROM1 Mode1 data track
Mode2, Data2, ROM2 or CDROM2 Mode2 data track
Up to 99 standard tracks can defined on a disc.
The Track statement enables track commands until an EndTrack statement is encountered.
Example
Track Mode0
See also: EndTrack
Generating Emulation Images 4-17
CD Emulator
Track Commands
Track commands define the highest level of track structure. They fall into the following categories:
Defining the component blocks of a track. Empty, Pause, PostGap, PreGap, Source, Volume,
XASource
Track label definitions. Index, ISRC
Subcode source file specification. SubcEmpty, SubcSource
Audio track specific definitions. Channels, Copy, PreEmphasis
Track definition termination. EndTrack
4-18 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
Channels
Function
Specifies the number of audio channels for an audio track.
Syntax
Channels <NumberOfChannels>
Default
The number of channels defaults to 2.
Remarks
This command is only valid within an audio track and specifies the number of audio channels that the data
has been recorded for. This information is included in the Q subcode channel. Valid numbers of channels
are:
2 or 4
This command is recognized but has not been implemented.
Example
Channels 4
Copy
Function
Specifies the state of the copy protection flag on an audio track.
Syntax
Copy <Boolean>
Default
The copy protection flag defaults to false.
Remarks
This command is only valid within an audio track.
Valid boolean values are:
• True, on, yes or 1
• False, off, no or 0
Example
Copy On
Generating Emulation Images 4-19
CD Emulator
Empty
Function
Specifies a section of track to contain empty frames.
Syntax
Empty <NumFrames>
Remarks
This command specifies that the next <NumFrames> frames of data will be zero filled.
This command is particularly useful for defining the length of leadin and leadout tracks that technically
shouldn’t contain any data.
Example
Empty 150
EndTrack
Function
Marks the end of the track definition.
Syntax
EndTrack
Remarks
The EndTrack statement closes the definition of a track and returns control to the previous command level.
Example
EndTrack
Index
Function
Places an index point into the track at this point.
Syntax
Index
Remarks
Each index point increments the index count by 1. The index count is automatically set to 1 at the start of
the track. The index count can have a maximum value of 99.
Indices must be separated by at least 1 frame of data.
Indices can only be defined in audio tracks that are not leadin or leadout tracks.
Example
Index
4-20 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
ISRC
Function
Allows for the definition of a track ISRC number to be placed in the Q subcode channel.
Syntax
ISRC <IsrcNumber>
Remarks
If no ISRC number is defined, one will not be included within the disc’s Q subcode channel. The ISRC
number is 12 digits long, made up of the following fields:
Country code 2 digits or uppercase letters
Owner code 3 digits or uppercase letters
Recording Year 2 digits
Serial Numbe 5 digits
An ISRC cannot be defined in leadin or leadout tracks.
Example
ISRC US2PD9443001
Pause
Function
Specifies a Pause section for the track.
Syntax
Pause <NumFrames>
Remarks
This command specifies that the track will be preceded by a pause of <NumFrames> frames of data. Pause
frames are always zero filled and will always be placed at the start of the track.
A Pause cannot be defined in leadin or leadout tracks.
A Pause must always be defined in the first standard track of the disc and in any track where the preceding
track is of a different data type.
A Pause must be a minimum of 150 frames in length, and it is recommended that Pauses are greater than
1000 frames.
Example
Pause 1500
Generating Emulation Images 4-21
CD Emulator
PostGap
Function
Specifies a PostGap section for the track.
Syntax
PostGap <NumFrames>
Remarks
This command specifies that the track will be followed by a gap of <NumFrames> frames of data. PostGap
frames are always zero filled and will always be placed at the end of the track.
A PostGap cannot be defined in audio tracks.
A PostGap must be a minimum of 150 frames in length.
Example
PostGap 150
PreEmphasis
Function
Specifies the state of the pre-emphasis flag on an audio track.
Syntax
PreEmphasis <Boolean>
Default
The pre-emphasis flag defaults to false.
Remarks
This command is only valid within an audio track.
Valid boolean values are:
• True, on, yes or 1
• False, off, no or 0
Example
PreEmphasis On
4-22 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
PreGap
Function
Specifies a PreGap section for the track.
Syntax
PreGap <NumFrames>
Remarks
This command specifies that the track will be started by a gap of <NumFrames> frames of data. PreGap
frames are always zero filled and will always be placed at the beginning of the track.
A PreGap cannot be defined in leadin, leadout or audio tracks.
A PreGap must be a minimum of 150 frames in length.
Example
PreGap 150
Source
Function
Specifies that the data from the specified file should be placed in the disc image at this point.
Syntax
Source <FileName>
Remarks
Any incomplete frame of data at the end of the file will be padded with zeros.
There are 3 data types for which a Source command is allowable. These are:
Audio Each frame of data is 2352 bytes long
Mode1 Each frame of data is 2048 bytes long
Mode2 Each frame of data is 2336 bytes long
This command is not allowed in an XA track at this level.
Example
Source c:\develop\data\psyqace.bin
See also: XASource
Generating Emulation Images 4-23
CD Emulator
Volume
Function
Marks the start of the definition of a track volume and defines a primary output file for the volume.
Syntax
Volume <VolumeType> [<TrackFileName>]
Remarks
No track file will be written unless the -t command line parameter is used when the program is invoked
and the track file name has been specified within this definition. No track file name can be specified in the
command line to override this track file name.
The only valid volume type is ISO9660.
The Volume statement enables the Volume commands until an EndVolume statement is encountered.
Example
Volume ISO9660
XASource
Function
Specifies that the data from the specified file should be placed in the disc image at this point and treated as
XA data.
Syntax
XASource <FileName>
Remarks
The contents of the file are 2336 byte fixed-length records of any combination of either Form1 or Form2
records. The records consist of the following fields:
Form1 Submode+Data+ECC+EDC
Form2 Submode+Data+EDC
This command is only valid in an XA track.
Example
XASource c:\develop\data\psyqace.mxa
See also: Source
4-24 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
Volume Commands
Volume commands define the highest level of ISO9660 track volume structure. They fall into the following
categories:
Volume descriptor definitions. PrimaryVolume
System area definition. SystemArea
Volume definition termination. EndVolume
Generating Emulation Images 4-25
CD Emulator
EndVolume
Function
Marks the end of the volume definition.
Syntax
EndVolume
Remarks
The EndVolume statement closes the definition of a volume and returns control to the previous command
level.
Example
EndVolume
PrimaryVolume
Function
Marks the start of a primary volume definition.
Syntax
PrimaryVolume
Remarks
An ISO volume must contain one and only primary volume definition.
The PrimaryVolume statement enables the Primary Volume commands until an EndPrimaryVolume
statement is encountered.
Example
PrimaryVolume
See also: EndPrimaryVolume
4-26 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
SystemArea
Function
Specifies that the data from the specified file should be placed in the ISO9660 system area.
Syntax
SystemArea <FileName>
Default
This area will be zero filled if no input file is specified.
Remarks
This command indicates that contents of the specified file should be placed into the ISO9660 system area.
The system area is the first 16 logical sectors of the volume. If the specified file is too long then its contents
will be truncated. If it is too short, then it will be zero padded.
The ISO standard does not specify what data should be placed in this area. It is up to system designers to
choose what they wish to be placed here.
Example
SystemArea c:\psyq\boot.bin
Generating Emulation Images 4-27
CD Emulator
PRIMARY Volume Commands
PrimaryVolume commands define the structure of the content of an ISO9660 Primary Volume descriptor.
They fall into the following categories:
Field value definitions. AbstractFileIdentifier, ApplicationIdentifier,
ApplicationUse, BibliographicFileIdentifier,
CopyrightFileIdentifier, DataPreparerIdentifier,
LogicalBlockSize, PublisherIdentifier,
SystemIdentifier, VolumeCreationDate,
VolumeEffectiveDate, VolumeExpirationDate,
VolumeIdentifier, VolumeModificationDate,
VolumeSetIdentifier
XA specific field value definitions. XAStartDirectory
Volume level definitions. DescriptorWrites
Volume contents definitions. Hierarchy, Lpath, MPath, OptionalLPath, OptionalMPath
Volume definition termination. EndPrimaryVolume
4-28 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
AbstractFileIdentifier
Function
Fills the abstract file identifier field with the specified root file name.
Syntax
AbstractFileIdentifier <CdRootFileName>
Default
If no command is encountered, then the field will be blank filled.
Remarks
This file name must be specified in the root directory of the volume’s hierarchy definition.
The file name must conform to ISO level 1 standards. That is, it must have no more than 8 file name
characters and 3 file extension characters.
Example
AbstractFileIdentifier ABSTRACT.DOC
ApplicationIdentifier
Function
Fills the application identifier field with the specified string.
Syntax
ApplicationIdentifier <String>
Default
If no command is encountered, then the field will be blank filled.
Remarks
The field holds a maximum of 128 characters. If the string’s first character is an underscore (‘_’ - 0x5F), the
remainder of the string is taken to be the name of a file in the root directory of the volume’s hierarchy
definition.
The filename must conform to ISO level 1 standards. That is, it must have no more than 8 file name
characters and 3 file extension characters.
The string, if not a file name, is made up of up to 128 ‘a’ characters. For a list of valid ‘a’ characters see
Appendix B, ISO Character Sets.
Example
ApplicationIdentifier _APP_ID.DOC
ApplicationIdentifier PSYQ APPLET
Generating Emulation Images 4-29
CD Emulator
ApplicationUse
Function
Fills the application use field with the contents of the specified file.
Syntax
ApplicationUse <FileName>
Default
If no command is encountered, then the field will be zero filled.
Remarks
This statement specifies the name of a file, the contents of which will be loaded into the application use field
of the volume descriptor. The field is 512 bytes long. If the input file is too long, then the contents will be
truncated. If the file is too short, then the field will be padded with zeros.
Example
ApplicationUse c:\devel\psyq\appuse.bin
BibliographicFileIdentifier
Function
Fills the bibliographic file identifier field with the specified root file name.
Syntax
BibliographicFileIdentifier <CdRootFileName>
Default
If no command is encountered, then the field will be blank filled.
Remarks
The file name must be specified in the root directory of the volume’s hierarchy definition.
The filename must conform to ISO level 1 standards. That is, it must have no more than 8 file name
characters and 3 file extension characters.
Example
BibliographicFileIdentifier BIB.DOC
4-30 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
CopyrightFileIdentifier
Function
Fills the copyright file identifier field with the specified root file name.
Syntax
CopyrightFileIdentifier <CdRootFileName>
Default
If no command is encountered, then the field will be blank filled.
Remarks
The file name must be specified in the root directory of the volume’s hierarchy definition.
The filename must conform to ISO level 1 standards. That is, it must have no more than 8 file name
characters and 3 file extension characters.
Example
CopyrightFileIdentifier COPYR.DOC
DataPreparerIdentifier
Function
Fills the data preparer identifier field with the specified string.
Syntax
DataPreparerIdentifier <String>
Default
If no command is encountered, then the field will be blank filled.
Remarks
The field holds a maximum of 128 characters. If the string’s first character is an underscore (‘_’ - 0x5F), the
remainder of the string is taken to be the name of a file in the root directory of the volume’s hierarchy
definition.
The filename must conform to ISO level 1 standards. That is, it must have no more than 8 file name
characters and 3 file extension characters.
The string, if not a file name, is made up of up to 128 ‘a’ characters. For a list of valid ‘a’ characters see
Appendix B, ISO Character Sets.
Example
DataPreparerIdentifier _DATID.DOC
DataPreparerIdentifier SNSYSTEMS
Generating Emulation Images 4-31
CD Emulator
DescriptorWrites
Function
Specifies the number of times that the volume descriptor is to be written to the output.
Syntax
DescriptorWrites <Number>
Default
If no command is encountered, then the descriptor will be written once.
Remarks
The ISO standard allows for the descriptor to be written out as many times as required. Each descriptor
record takes up one sector of disc space.
PSX Restriction: With PSX, volume descriptors can only be written once (i.e., DescriptorWrites can only be
set to a value of 1).
Example
DescriptorWrites 1
EndPrimaryVolume
Function
Marks the end of the primary volume definition.
Syntax
EndPrimaryVolume
Remarks
The EndPrimaryVolume statement closes the definition of a primary volume and returns control to the
previous command level.
Example
EndPrimaryVolume
4-32 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
Hierarchy
Function
Marks the start of a directory hierarchy.
Syntax
Hierarchy
Remarks
The must be one and only one hierarchy definition within each primary volume definition.
The Hierarchy statement enables the hierarchy commands until an EndHierarchy statement is encountered.
Example
Hierarchy
See also: EndHierarchy
LogicalBlockSize
Function
Specifies the logical block size of the volume descriptor.
Syntax
LogicalBlockSize <BlockSize>
Default
The logical block size defaults to 2048.
Remarks
Valid block size values are 512, 1024 and 2048.
This command Is recognized but has not been implemented.
Example
LogicalBlockSize 2048
Generating Emulation Images 4-33
CD Emulator
LPath
Function
Specifies the position of an L type path table.
Syntax
LPath
Remarks
A path table is a directory quick reference to allow an executing program to find a particular directory record
without having to recurse all the way down the directory structure.
There are 2 types of path tables; L and M. An L path table is set out least significant byte first, while an M
path table is set out most significant byte first.
There must be one and only one LPath definition within each primary volume definition. Within a PSX disc
definition, the LPath will be automatically placed correctly.
Example
Lpath
See also: MPath
MPath
Function
Specifies the position of an M type path table.
Syntax
MPath
Remarks
A path table is a directory quick reference to allow an executing program to find a particular directory record
without having to recurse all the way down the directory structure.
There are 2 types of path tables; L and M. An L path table is set out least significant byte first, while an M
path table is set out most significant byte first.
There must be one and only one MPath definition within each primary volume definition. Within a PSX disc
definition, the MPath will be automatically placed correctly.
Example
Mpath
See also: Lpath
4-34 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
OptionalLPath
Function
Specifies the position of an optional additional L type path table.
Syntax
OptionalLPath
Default
No additional L path table will be written into the image if this command is not encountered.
Remarks
The additional path table is identical in all respects to the original. A path table is a directory quick reference
to allow an executing program to find a particular directory record without having to recurse all the way
down the directory structure.
There are 2 types of path tables; L and M. An L path table is set out least significant byte first, while an M
path table is set out most significant byte first.
Ther can be at most only one OptionalLPath definition within each primary volume definition. Within a PSX
disc definition, the OptionalLPath will be automatically placed correctly.
Example
OptionalLpath
See also: LPath, OptionalMPath
OptionalMPath
Function
Specifies the position of an optional additional M type path table.
Syntax
OptionalMPath
Default
No additional M path table will be written into the image if this command is not encountered.
Remarks
The additional path table is identical in all respects to the original. A path table is a directory quick reference
to allow an executing program to find a particular directory record without having to recurse all the way
down the directory structure.
There are 2 types of path tables; L and M. An L path table is set out least significant byte first, while an M
path table is set out most significant byte first.
There can be at most only one OptionalMPath definition within each primary volume definition. Within a PSX
disc definition the OptionalMPath will be automatically placed correctly.
Example
OptionalMpath
See also: MPath, OptionalLPath
Generating Emulation Images 4-35
CD Emulator
PublisherIdentifier
Function
Fills the publisher identifier field with the specified string.
Syntax
PublisherIdentifier <String>
Default
If no command is encountered, then the field will be blank filled.
Remarks
The field holds a maximum of 128 characters. If the string’s first character is an underscore (‘_’ - 0x5F), the
remainder of the string is taken to be the name of a file in the root directory of the volume’s hierarchy
definition.
The filename must conform to ISO level 1 standards. That is, it must have no more than 8 file name
characters and 3 file extension characters.
The string, if not a file name, is made up of up to 128 ‘a’ characters. For a list of valid ‘a’ characters see
Appendix B, ISO Character Sets.
Example
PublisherIdentifier _PUBID.DOC
PublisherIdentifier SNSYSTEMS
SystemIdentifier
Function
Fills the system identifier field with the specified system name string.
Syntax
SystemIdentifier <SystemNameString>
Remarks
This field specifies the system identifiers that can act upon the contents of the System Area contents.
The must be one and only one SystemIdentifier definition within each primary volume definition.
The string is made up of up to 32 ‘a’ characters. For a list of valid ‘a’ characters see Appendix B, ISO
Character Sets.
For a PSX disc, the system identifier must be defined as PLAYSTATION.
Example
SystemIdentifier DOS
4-36 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
VolumeCreationDate
Function
Fills the volume creation field with the specified date and time.
Syntax
VolumeCreationDate <Date> <Time> [<Offset>]
Default
If no creation date and time are given, then the date and time of creation of the volume descriptor will be
used with the default Greenwich offset.
Remarks
This statement specifies the date, time and specific Greenwich offset of the volume descriptor creation. Any
valid date and time can be input.
Dates must be specified in the following format:
MM/DD/YYYY
Times must be specified in the following format:
HH:MM:SS:hh
The specific Greenwich offset must be specified in exactly the same format as for the GreenwichOffset
command. If no offset is specified then the default Greenwich offset will be used.
Example
VolumeCreationDate 01/26/1963 06:45:00:00 0
See also: GreenwichOffset
Generating Emulation Images 4-37
CD Emulator
VolumeEffectiveDate
Function
Fills the volume effective field with the specified date and time.
Syntax
VolumeEffectiveDate <Date> <Time> [<Offset>]
Default
If no effective date and time are given, then the field in the volume descriptor will be set to:
00/00/0000 00:00:00:00 0
Remarks
This statement specifies the date, time and specific Greenwich offset of the volume descriptor becoming
effective. Any valid date and time can be input.
Dates must be specified in the following format:
MM/DD/YYYY
Times must be specified in the following format:
HH:MM:SS:hh
The specific Greenwich offset must be specified in exactly the same format as for the GreenwichOffset
command. If no offset is specified then the default Greenwich offset will be used.
Example
VolumeEffectiveDate 01/26/1963 06:45:00:00 0
See also: GreenwichOffset
4-38 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
VolumeExpirationDate
Function
Fills the volume expiration field with the specified date and time.
Syntax
VolumeExpirationDate <Date> <Time> [<Offset>]
Default
If no expiry date and time are given, then the field in the volume descriptor will be set to:
00/00/0000 00:00:00:00 0
Remarks
This statement specifies the date, time and specific Greenwich offset of the volume descriptor expiring. Any
valid date and time can be input.
Dates must be specified in the following format:
MM/DD/YYYY
Times must be specified in the following format:
HH:MM:SS:hh
The specific Greenwich offset must be specified in exactly the same format as for the GreenwichOffset
command. If no offset is specified then the default Greenwich offset will be used.
Example
VolumeExpirationDate 01/26/1963 06:45:00:00 0
See also: GreenwichOffset
VolumeIdentifier
Function
Fills the volume identifier field with the specified string.
Syntax
VolumeIdentifier <String>
Remarks
The must be one and only one VolumeIdentifier definition within each primary volume definition.
The string is made up of up to 32 ‘d’ characters. For a list of valid ‘d’ characters see Appendix B, ISO
Character Sets.
Example
VolumeIdentifier MEGAGAME1
Generating Emulation Images 4-39
CD Emulator
VolumeModificationDate
Function
Fills the volume modification field with the specified date and time.
Syntax
VolumeModificationDate <Date> <Time> [<Offset>]
Default
If no modification date and time are given, then the date and time of creation of the volume descriptor will
be used with the default Greenwich offset.
Remarks
This statement specifies the date, time and specific Greenwich offset of the last volume descriptor
modification. Any valid date and time can be input.
Dates must be specified in the following format:
MM/DD/YYYY
Times must be specified in the following format:
HH:MM:SS:hh
The specific Greenwich offset must be specified in exactly the same format as for the GreenwichOffset
command. If no offset is specified then the default Greenwich offset will be used.
Example
VolumeModificationDate 01/26/1963 06:45:00:00 0
See also: GreenwichOffset
VolumeSetIdentifier
Function
Fills the volume set identifier field with the specified string.
Syntax
VolumeSetIdentifier <String>
Default
If no command is encountered, then the field will be blank filled.
Remarks
The string is made up of up to 128 ‘d’ characters. For a list of valid ‘d’ characters see Appendix B, ISO
Character Sets.
Example
VolumeSetIdentifier MEGAGAME1
4-40 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
XAStartDirectory
Function
Fills the start directory field with the specified CD directory name.
Syntax
XAStartDirectory <String>
Default
If no command is encountered, then the field will be zero filled.
Remarks
The string is made up of up to 8 ‘d’ characters and must be a valid subdirectory of the CD root directory
hierarchy.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
For a list of valid ‘d’ characters see Appendix B, ISO Character Sets.
Example
XAStartDirectory STARTUP
Generating Emulation Images 4-41
CD Emulator
Directory Hierarchy Commands
Directory hierarchy commands define the structure of the root directory of an ISO9660 Primary or
Supplementary volume. The commands fall into the following categories:
Directory space allocation definitions. AddLength, MinLength, Gap
Directory attribute definitions. Attributes, RecordingDate
XA specific directory attribute definitions. XAAudioAttributes, XAFileAttributes,
XAFilePermissions, XAOwnerGroup, XAOwnerUser,
XAVideoAttributes
Directory object definitions. Directory, File, SourceDirectory,
XAInterleavedFile
Volume definition termination. EndHierarchy
4-42 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
AddLength
Function
Specifies the number of bytes to be added to the length of the generated directory record.
Syntax
AddLength <Length>
Default
If no command is encountered, then AddLength defaults to zero.
Remarks
This statement specifies a number of zero filled bytes to be added onto the end of the directory structure.
This directory record may then be further zero filled to take it to a frame boundary.
AddLength will always be performed before MinLength. Therefore a directory of say 10 files will produce a
directory structure of about 400 bytes. An AddLength of 1800 bytes will increase this size to 2200 bytes. A
MinLength of 2048 will have no effect but the final directory structure will be written in 2 x 2048 bytes
blocks (i.e. 2 frames).
Example
AddLength 512
See also: MinLength
Attributes
Function
Specifies the directory attribute flags.
Syntax
Attributes <Attribute>
Default
If no command is encountered, then the Attributes default to NotHidden.
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• Hidden
• NotHidden
If the Hidden attribute is defined, then the directory will not be made known to the user.
Example
Attributes Hidden
Generating Emulation Images 4-43
CD Emulator
Directory
Function
Marks the start of a directory definition.
Syntax
Directory <DirectoryName>
Remarks
The Directory statement specifies the start of a directory definition with the name specified.
Example
Directory PSYQSRC
See also: EndDirectory
EndHierarchy
Function
Marks the end of a hierarchy definition.
Syntax
EndHierarchy
Remarks
The EndHierarchy statement closes the definition of a hierarchy record and returns control to the previous
command level.
Example
EndHierarchy
4-44 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
File
Function
Marks the start of a file definition.
Syntax
File <ISOFileName> [<Version>]
Default
If the version number is not specified, then it defaults to 1.
Remarks
The File statement specifies the start of a ISO file definition with the name specified.
The File statement enables the File commands until an EndFile statement is encountered.
For an XA disc, the version must be 1.
Example
File MONSTERS.GPH 2
See also: EndFile
Gap
Function
Places empty sectors within the hierarchy definition.
Syntax
Gap <Num Empty Sectors>
Remarks
The Gap statement places an empty area within the hierarchy definition of length NumEmptySectors. This
feature can be used to position files explicitly within the image.
Example
Gap 20
Generating Emulation Images 4-45
CD Emulator
MinLength
Function
Specifies the minimum number of bytes of the directory record.
Syntax
MinLength <Length>
Default
If no command is encountered, then MinLength defaults to zero.
Remarks
This statement specifies a minimum size of directory structure that the actual record will be blank filled to.
This directory record may then be further zero filled to take it to a frame boundary.
AddLength will always be performed before MinLength. Therefore a directory of say 10 files will produce a
directory structure of about 400 bytes. An AddLength of 1800 bytes will increase this size to 2200 bytes. A
MinLength of 2048 will have no effect but the final directory structure will be written in 2 x 2048 bytes
blocks (i.e. 2 frames).
Example
MinLength 512
See also: AddLength
4-46 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
RecordingDate
Function
Logs the recording date of the directory with the specified date and time.
Syntax
RecordingDate <Date> <Time> [<Offset>]
Default
If no recording date and time are given, then the date and time of creation of the directory record will be
used.
If no offset is specified then the default Greenwich offset will be used.
Remarks
This statement specifies the date, time and specific Greenwich offset of the directory record. Any valid date
and time can be input.
Dates must be specified in the following format:
MM/DD/YYYY
Times must be specified in the following format:
HH:MM:SS:hh
The specific Greenwich offset must be specified in exactly the same format as for the GreenwichOffset
command.
Example
RecordingDate 01/26/1963 06:45:00:00 0
See also: GreenwichOffset
Generating Emulation Images 4-47
CD Emulator
SourceDirectory
Function
Searches the specified directory, and files within it, to recreate the structure and contents in the image.
Syntax
SourceDirectory <DOSDirectory> [<Att1>] [<Att2>] [...]
Default
The command has the following defaults:
• Subroutines will not be recursed.
• All files will be included.
• No additional spare space will be generated.
Remarks
This statement can be used to copy whole directory hierarchies directly into the present directory.
If the keyword ‘SubDirectories’ appears as one of the attributes, then all subdirectories of the named DOS
directory will be searched recursively, copying all the valid filenames to the image.
If the keyword ‘IncludeWilds’ appears, then the command will only retrieve files from the directory and subdirectories complying to the format(s) of those attributes that are wildcard definitions.
If the keyword ‘ExcludeWilds’ appears, then the command will only retrieve files from the directory and subdirectories not complying to the format(s) of those attributes that are wildcard definitions.
If the keyword ‘SpareSpace’ appears, then the command will add in extra zeros at the end of the files’
contents. The attribute must be followed by an equals sign and then a number specifying a percentage of
additional space to be added. This value can be from 0 to 400. The % sign is optional.
Example
SourceDirectory c:\tmp SubDirectories
SourceDirectory c:\tmp ExcludeWilds *.prj *.td
SourceDirectory c:\tmp *.c SpareSpace=25%
4-48 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
XAAudioAttributes
Function
Specifies the default audio attribute flags.
Syntax
XAAudioAttributes <Attribute> [<Attribute>] [...]
Default
If no command is encountered, then the Attributes default to Emphasis Off, ADPCM Level B, Mono.
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• Emphasis_On and Emphasis_Off
• ADPCM_B and ADPCM_C
• Mono and Stereo
Any combination of the non-mutually exclusive attributes is allowed.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAAudioAttributes Emphasis_On Stereo
XAFileAttributes
Function
Specifies the default file attribute flags.
Syntax
XAFileAttributes <Attribute> [<Attribute>]
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• Form1 or 1 and Form2 or 2
• Audio, Video and Data
Any combination of the non-mutually exclusive attributes is allowed.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAFileAttributes Form1 Data
Generating Emulation Images 4-49
CD Emulator
XAFilePermissions
Function
Specifies the default file permission flags.
Syntax
XAFilePermissions <Attribute> [<Attribute>] [...]
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• Owner_Read
• Owner_Execute
• Group_Read
• Group_Execute
• World_Read
• World_Execute
Any combination of attributes is allowed.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAFilePermissions Owner_Read
XAInterleavedFile
Function
Marks the start of an XA interleaved file definition.
Syntax
XAInterleavedFile <ISOFileName> [<Filename>]
Remarks
The File statement specifies the start of the definition of an XA file with interleaved channels.
The XAInterleavedFile statement enables the Interleaved File commands until an XAEndInterleaveFile
statement is encountered.
Example
XAInterleavedFile MONSTERS.GPH c:\games\output.str
See also: XAEndInterleavedFile
4-50 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
XAOwnerGroup
Function
Specifies the default file Owner Group Identifier.
Syntax
XAOwnerGroup <GroupIdentifier>
Default
The owner group defaults to zero.
Remarks
The owner group identifier is a number between 0 and 65535.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAOwnerGroup 27
XAOwnerUser
Function
Specifies the default file Owner User Identifier.
Syntax
XAOwnerUser <UserIdentifier>
Default
The owner user defaults to zero.
Remarks
The owner user identifier is a number between 0 and 65535.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAOwnerUser 15
Generating Emulation Images 4-51
CD Emulator
XAVideoAttributes
Function
Specifies the default video attribute flags.
Syntax
XAVideoAttributes <Attribute> [<Attribute>] [...]
Default
If no command is encountered, then the Attributes default to Application Specific.
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• ApplicationSpecific
or a combination of
• 640x480 and 320x240
• Clut1, Clut2, Clut4 and Clut8
Any combination of the non-mutually exclusive attributes is allowed.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAVideoAttributes ApplicationSpecific
XAVideoAttributes 640x480 Clut2
4-52 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
Directory Commands
Directory commands define the structure of a sub-directory of an ISO9660 Primary or Supplementary
volume. The commands fall into the following categories:
Directory space allocation definitions. AddLength, MinLength
Directory attribute definitions. Attributes, RecordingDate
XA specific directory attribute definitions. XAAudioAttributes, XAFileAttributes,
XAFilePermissions, XAOwnerGroup, XAOwnerUser,
XAVideoAttributes
Directory object definitions. Directory, File, SourceDirectory,
XAInterleavedFile
Command definition termination. EndDirectory
Generating Emulation Images 4-53
CD Emulator
AddLength
Function
Specifies the number of bytes to be added to the length of the generated directory record.
Syntax
AddLength <Length>
Default
If no command is encountered, then AddLength defaults to zero.
Remarks
This statement specifies a number of zero filled bytes to be added onto the end of the directory structure.
This directory record may then be further zero filled to take it to a frame boundary.
AddLength will always be performed before MinLength. Therefore a directory of say 10 files will produce a
directory structure of about 400 bytes. An AddLength of 1800 bytes will increase this size to 2200 bytes. A
MinLength of 2048 will have no effect but the final directory structure will be written in 2 x 2048 bytes
blocks (i.e. 2 frames).
Example
AddLength 512
See also: MinLength
Attributes
Function
Specifies the directory attribute flags.
Syntax
Attributes <Attribute>
Default
If no command is encountered, then the Attributes default to NotHidden.
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• Hidden
• NotHidden
If the Hidden attribute is defined then the directory will not be made known to the user.
Example
Attributes Hidden
4-54 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
Directory
Function
Marks the start of a directory definition.
Syntax
Directory <DirectoryName>
Remarks
The Directory statement specifies the start of a directory definition with the name specified.
The Directory statement enables the Directory commands an EndDirectory statement is encountered.
Example
Directory PSYQSRC
See also: EndDirectory
EndDirectory
Function
Marks the end of a directory definition.
Syntax
EndDirectory
Remarks
The EndDirectory statement closes the definition of a directory record and returns control to the previous
command level.
Example
EndDirectory
Generating Emulation Images 4-55
CD Emulator
File
Function
Marks the start of a file definition.
Syntax
File <ISOFileName> [<Version>]
Default
If the version number is not specified, then it defaults to 1.
Remarks
The File statement enables the File commands until an EndFile statement is encountered.
For an XA disc, the version must be 1.
Example
File MONSTERS.GPH 2
See also: EndFile
Gap
Function
Places empty sectors within the hierarchy definition.
Syntax
Gap <Num Empty Sectors>
Remarks
The Gap statement places an empty area within the hierarchy definition of length NumEmptySectors. This
feature can be used to position files explicitly within the image.
Example
Gap 20
4-56 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
MinLength
Function
Specifies the minimum number of bytes of the directory record.
Syntax
MinLength <Length>
Default
If no command is encountered, then MinLength defaults to zero.
Remarks
This statement specifies a minimum size of directory structure that the actual record will be blank filled to.
This directory record may then be further zero filled to take it to a frame boundary.
AddLength will always be performed before MinLength. Therefore a directory of say 10 files will produce a
directory structure of about 400 bytes. An AddLength of 1800 bytes will increase this size to 2200 bytes. A
MinLength of 2048 will have no effect but the final directory structure will be written in 2 x 2048 bytes
blocks (i.e. 2 frames).
Example
MinLength 512
See also: AddLength
Generating Emulation Images 4-57
CD Emulator
RecordingDate
Function
Logs the recording date of the directory with the specified date and time.
Syntax
RecordingDate <Date> <Time> [<Offset>]
Default
If no recording date and time are given, then the date and time of creation of the directory record will be
used.
If no offset is specified, then the default Greenwich offset will be used.
Remarks
This statement specifies the date, time and specific Greenwich offset of the directory record. Any valid date
and time can be input.
Dates must be specified in the following format:
MM/DD/YYYY
Times must be specified in the following format:
HH:MM:SS:hh
The specific Greenwich offset must be specified in exactly the same format as for the GreenwichOffset
command.
Example
RecordingDate 01/26/1963 06:45:00:00 0
See also: GreenwichOffset
4-58 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
SourceDirectory
Function
Searches the specified directory and files within it to recreate the structure and contents in the image.
Syntax
SourceDirectory <DOSDirectory> [<Att1>] [<Att2>] [...]
Default
The command has the following defaults:
• Subroutines will not be recursed.
• All files will be included.
• No additional spare space will be generated.
Remarks
This statement can be used to copy whole directory hierarchies directly into the present directory.
If the keyword ‘SubDirectories’ appears as one of the attributes, then all subdirectories of the named DOS
directory will be searched recursively, copying all the valid filenames to the image.
If the keyword ‘IncludeWilds’ appears, then the command will only retrieve files from the directory and subdirectories complying to the format(s) of those attributes that are wildcard definitions.
If the keyword ‘ExcludeWilds’ appears, then the command will only retrieve files from the directory and
sub-directories not complying to the format(s) of those attributes that are wildcard definitions.
If the keyword ‘SpareSpace’ appears, then the command will add in extra zeros at the end of the files’
contents. The attribute must be followed by an equals sign and then a number specifying a percentage of
additional space to be added. This value can be from 0 to 400. The % sign is optional.
Example
SourceDirectory c:\tmp SubDirectories
SourceDirectory c:\tmp ExcludeWilds *.prj *.td|
SourceDirectory c:\tmp *.c SpareSpace=25%
Generating Emulation Images 4-59
CD Emulator
XAAudioAttributes
Function
Specifies the default audio attribute flags.
Syntax
XAAudioAttributes <Attribute> [<Attribute>] [...]
Default
If no command is encountered, then the attributes default to the parent directory default.
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• Emphasis_On and Emphasis_Off
• ADPCM_B and ADPCM_C
• Mono and Stereo
Any combination of the non-mutually exclusive attributes is allowed.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAAudioAttributes Emphasis_On Stereo
XAFileAttributes
Function
Specifies the default file attribute flags.
Syntax
XAFileAttributes <Attribute> [<Attribute>]
Default
If no command is encountered, then the attributes default to the parent directory default.
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• Form1 or 1 and Form2 or 2
• Audio, Video and Data
Any combination of the non-mutually exclusive attributes is allowed.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAFileAttributes Form1 Data
4-60 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
XAFilePermissions
Function
Specifies the default file permission flags.
Syntax
XAFilePermissions <Attribute> [<Attribute>] [...]
Default
If no command is encountered, then the attributes default to the parent directory default.
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• Owner_Read
• Owner_Execute
• Group_Read
• Group_Execute
• World_Read
• World_Execute
Any combination of attributes is allowed.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAFilePermissions Owner_Read
XAInterleavedFile
Function
Marks the start of an XA interleaved file definition.
Syntax
XAInterleavedFile <ISOFileName> [<Interleaved Output File>]
Remarks
The File statement specifies the start of the definition of an XA file with interleaved channels.
The XAInterleavedFile statement enables the Interleaved File commands until an XAEndInterleaveFile
statement is encountered.
The Interleaved Output File will be output only if the -g is specified on the command line. The contents of
each of the interleaved channels are amalgamated into a single interleaved output file with all parity and
CRC values set to zero. This file output can then be used as input to an XAF source command.
Example
XAInterleavedFile MONSTERS.GPH
See also: XAEndInterleavedFile
Generating Emulation Images 4-61
CD Emulator
XAOwnerGroup
Function
Specifies the default file Owner Group Identifier.
Syntax
XAOwnerGroup <GroupIdentifier>
Default
If no command is encountered, then the owner group defaults to the parent directory default.
Remarks
The owner group identifier is a number between 0 and 65535.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAOwnerGroup 27
XAOwnerUser
Function
Specifies the default file Owner User Identifier.
Syntax
XAOwnerUser <UserIdentifier>
Default
If no command is encountered, then the user identifier defaults to the parent directory default.
Remarks
The owner user identifier is a number between 0 and 65535.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAOwnerUser 15
4-62 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
XAVideoAttributes
Function
Specifies the default video attribute flags.
Syntax
XAVideoAttributes <Attribute> [<Attribute>] [...]
Default
If no command is encountered, then the attributes default to the parent directory default.
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• ApplicationSpecific
or a combination of
• 640x480 and 320x240
• Clut1, Clut2, Clut4 and Clut8
Any combination of the non-mutually exclusive attributes is allowed.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAVideoAttributes ApplicationSpecific
XAVideoAttributes 640x480 Clut2
Generating Emulation Images 4-63
CD Emulator
File Commands
File commands define the contents of an ISO9660 File. The commands fall into the following categories:
File space allocation definitions. AddLength, MinLength
File attribute definitions. Attributes, RecordingDate
XA file attribute definitions. XAAudioAttributes, XAEndOfRecord, XAFileAttributes,
XAFilePermissions, XAOwnerGroup, XAOwnerUser,
XATrigger, XAVideoAttributes
File object definitions. Source, XASource
Command definition termination. EndFile
4-64 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
AddLength
Function
Specifies the number of bytes to be added to the length of the file contents.
Syntax
AddLength <Length>
Default
If no command is encountered, then AddLength defaults to zero.
Remarks
This statement specifies a number of zero filled bytes to be added onto the end of the file contents. This file
may then be further zero filled to take it to a frame boundary.
AddLength will always be performed before MinLength. Therefore if we have a file of say 400 bytes, an
AddLength of 1800 bytes will increase this size to 2200 bytes. A MinLength of 2048 will have no effect but
the final record will be written in 2 x 2048 bytes blocks (i.e. 2 frames).
Example
AddLength 512
See also: MinLength
Attributes
Function
Specifies the file attribute flags.
Syntax
Attributes <Attribute> [<Attribute>]
Default
If no command is encountered, then the attributes default to NotHidden.
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• Hidden or NotHidden
• Record or NotRecord
If the Hidden attribute is defined, then the file will not be made known to the user.
If the Record attribute is defined, then the file will be flagged as a record.
Example
Attributes Hidden NotRecord
Generating Emulation Images 4-65
CD Emulator
EndFile
Function
Marks the end of a file definition.
Syntax
EndFile
Remarks
The EndFile statement closes the definition of a file record and returns control to the previous command
level.
Example
EndFile
MinLength
Function
Specifies the minimum number of bytes of a file record.
Syntax
MinLength <Length>
Default
If no command is encountered, then MinLength defaults to zero.
Remarks
This statement specifies a minimum size of file record. If the file is smaller than this, then it will be blank filled
to the specified size.
The file may then be further zero filled to take it to a frame boundary.
AddLength will always be performed before MinLength. Therefore if we have a file of say 400 bytes, an
AddLength of 1800 bytes will increase this size to 2200 bytes. A MinLength of 2048 will have no effect but
the final record will be written in 2 x 2048 bytes blocks (i.e. 2 frames).
Example
MinLength 512
See also: AddLength
4-66 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
RecordingDate
Function
Logs the recording date of the file with the specified date and time.
Syntax
RecordingDate <Date> <Time> [<Offset>]
Default
If no recording date and time are given, then the DOS date and time of creation of the source file will be
used.
If no offset is specified then the default Greenwich offset will be used.
Remarks
This statement specifies the date, time and specific Greenwich offset of the file. Any valid date and time can
be input.
Dates must be specified in the following format:
MM/DD/YYYY
Times must be specified in the following format:
HH:MM:SS:hh
The specific Greenwich offset must be specified in exactly the same format as for the GreenwichOffset
command.
Example
RecordingDate 01/26/1963 06:45:00:00 0
See also: GreenwichOffset
Source
Function
Specifies that the contents of the file are to be copied from the file specified.
Syntax
Source <FileName>
Remarks
This command indicates that contents of the specified file should be used as the contents of the ISO file.
Any incomplete frame of data at the end of the file will be padded with zeros.
Example
Source c:\develop\data\psyqace.bin
Generating Emulation Images 4-67
CD Emulator
XAAudioAttributes
Function
Specifies the file’s audio attribute flags.
Syntax
XAAudioAttributes <Attribute> [<Attribute>] [...]
Default
If no command is encountered, then the attributes default to the parent directory default.
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• Emphasis_On and Emphasis_Off
• ADPCM_B and ADPCM_C
• Mono and Stereo
Any combination of the non-mutually exclusive attributes is allowed.
This statement is only valid within an XA track for a file defined as being Audio.
Example
XAAudioAttributes Emphasis_On Stereo
XAEndOfRecord
Function
Specifies the positions of End Of Record flags within the file.
Syntax
XAEndOfRecord <EOROffset> [<EOROffset>] [...] [EndOfFile]
Remarks
This command can be called more than once for a file.
The EndOfRecord Offset is the number of frames into the file that the end-of-record marker is to be set at.
The EndOfFile parameter allows the End Of Record flag to be placed at the end of the file (after adjustment
by AddLength and MinLength!) without precalculation of position.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAEndOfRecord 15 30 45 90
4-68 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
XAFileAttributes
Function
Specifies the file attribute flags.
Syntax
XAFileAttributes <Attribute> [<Attribute>]
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• Form1 or 1 and Form2 or 2
• Audio, Video and Data
Any combination of the non-mutually exclusive attributes is allowed.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAFileAttributes Form1 Data
XAFilePermissions
Function
Specifies the default file permission flags.
Syntax
XAFilePermissions <Attribute> [<Attribute>] [...]
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• Owner_Read
• Owner_Execute
• Group_Read
• Group_Execute
• World_Read
• World_Execute
Any combination of attributes is allowed.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAFilePermissions Owner_Read
Generating Emulation Images 4-69
CD Emulator
XAOwnerGroup
Function
Specifies the default file Owner Group Identifier.
Syntax
XAOwnerGroup <GroupIdentifier>
Default
The owner group defaults to zero.
Remarks
The owner group identifier is a number between 0 and 65535.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAOwnerGroup 27
XAOwnerUser
Function
Specifies the default file Owner User Identifier.
Syntax
XAOwnerUser <UserIdentifier>
Default
The owner user defaults to zero.
Remarks
The owner user identifier is a number between 0 and 65535.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAOwnerUser 15
4-70 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
XASource
Function
Specifies that the data from the specified file is to be copied from the specified file.
Syntax
XASource <FileName>
Remarks
This command indicates that contents of the specified file should be used as the contents of the CD file
within the XA track.
The contents of the file are 2336-byte fixed length records of any combination of either Form1 or Form2
records. The records consist of the following fields:
Form1 Submode+Data+ECC+EDC
Form2 Submode+Data+EDC
Because the input files already have all the submode data set up within them this command cannot appear
within a File specification with the following XA commands:
• XAAudioAttributes
• XAEndOfRecord
• XAFileAttributes
• XATrigger
• XAVideoAttributes
This command is only valid in an XA track.
Example
XASource c:\develop\data\psyqace.mxa
See also: Source
XATrigger
Function
Specifies the positions of trigger flags within the file.
Syntax
XATrigger <TrigOffset> [<TrigOffset>] [...] [EndOfFile]
Remarks
This command can be called more than once for a file.
The Trigger Offset is the number of frames into the file that the trigger marker is to be set at.
The EndOfFile parameter allows a trigger to be placed at the end of the file (after adjustment by AddLength
and MinLength!) without precalculation of position.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XATrigger 15 30 45 90
Generating Emulation Images 4-71
CD Emulator
XAVideoAttributes
Function
Specifies the default video attribute flags.
Syntax
XAVideoAttributes <Attribute> [<Attribute>] [...]
Default
If no command is encountered, then the Attributes default to Application Specific.
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• ApplicationSpecific
or a combination of
• 640x480 and 320x240
• Clut1, Clut2, Clut4 and Clut8
Any combination of the non-mutually exclusive attributes is allowed.
This statement is only valid within an XA track.
Example
XAVideoAttributes ApplicationSpecific
XAVideoAttributes 640x480 Clut2
4-72 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
XA Interleaved File Commands
XA Interleaved File commands define the contents of an XA File with interleaved channels. The commands
fall into the following categories:
File attribute definitions Attributes, RecordingDate
XA file attribute definitions XAFilePermissions, XAOwnerGroup, XAOwnerUser
File object definitions XAChannel
Interleave definitions XAChannelInterleave
Command definition termination XAEndInterleavedFile
Generating Emulation Images 4-73
CD Emulator
Attributes
Function
Specifies the file attribute flags.
Syntax
Attributes <Attribute> [<Attribute>]
Default
If no command is encountered, then the Attributes default to NotHidden.
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• Hidden or NotHidden
• Record or NotRecord
If the Hidden attribute is defined, then the file will not be made known to the user.
If the Record attribute is defined, then the file will be flagged as a record.
Example
Attributes Hidden NotRecord
4-74 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
RecordingDate
Function
Logs the recording date of the file with the specified date and time.
Syntax
RecordingDate <Date> <Time> [<Offset>]
Default
If no recording date and time are given, then the DOS date and time of creation of the source file will be
used.
If no offset is specified then the default Greenwich offset will be used.
Remarks
This statement specifies the date, time and specific greenwich offset of the file. Any valid date and time can
be input.
Dates must be specified in the following format:
MM/DD/YYYY
Times must be specified in the following format:
HH:MM:SS:hh
The specific Greenwich offset must be specified in exactly the same format as for the GreenwichOffset
command.
Example
RecordingDate 01/26/1963 06:45:00:00 0
See also: GreenwichOffset
XAChannel
Function
Marks the start of an XA channel definition.
Syntax
XAChannel <ChannelNumber>
Remarks
The XAChannel statement specifies the start of the definition of an XA channel within an XA Interleaved file.
The Channel Number must be a number between 1 and 32 inclusive. Only one channel definition for each
channel number is allowed.
The XAChannel statement enables the Channel commands until an XAEndChannel statement is
encountered.
Example
XAChannel 3
See also: XAEndChannel
Generating Emulation Images 4-75
CD Emulator
XAChannelInterleave
Function
Defines the format of the XA channel interleave.
Syntax
XAChannelInterleave <I’type> [<arg>] [<I’type> [<arg>]]
Remarks
The XAChannelInterleave statement specifies how the channels within the XA file are to be interleaved.
The valid interleave types are:
• TimeCritical
• Explicit
• Proportional
• Even
• PaddedEven
TimeCritical and Explicit
These two interleave types are for the most part the same, as they must be both followed by an argument
string that defines the order in which key channels are to be interleaved. The only difference between the
two types is that all explicitly defined channels within a TimeCritical argument string will be marked as Real
Time.
The argument string is a list of channels separated by hyphens. Gaps can be defined by including Xs in the
definition, which are to be filled by a further interleave definition. Padding blanks can be specified by
including Bs in the string. The string will be used repeatedly until all channels have been fully output.
Only 2 levels of interleave definition are allowed, and only TimeCritical and Explicit interleaves allow for a
further level of definition. TimeCritical interleaves can only appear as the first interleave, and no Xs can
appear in a secondary Explicit definition.
Proportional
A proportional interleave uses the length of the data within each channel to calculate the order of sectors.
Channels with more data will be added to the image more regularly than channels with less. In this way all
channels will start and end at approximately the same point within the image.
Even
An even interleave outputs one sector from each channel in sequence until all channels have been fully
output.
PaddedEven
A padded-even interleave outputs one sector from each channel in sequence until all channels have been
fully output, just like an even interleave. However it will intersperse the packets of data for each channel with
blank sectors to ensure that, like the proportional interleave, all channels start and end at approximately the
same point.
There must be one and only one XAChannelInterleave statement within XAInterleavedFile definition.
Example
XAChannelInterleave Even
XAChannelInterleave TimeCritical 1-2-X-X PaddedEven
4-76 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
XAEndInterleavedFile
Function
Marks the end of an XA interleaved file definition.
Syntax
XAEndInterleavedFile
Remarks
The XAEndInterleavedFile statement closes the definition of an XA interleaved file record and returns control
to the previous command level.
Example
XAEndInterleavedFile
XAFilePermissions
Function
Specifies the default file permission flags.
Syntax
XAFilePermissions <Attribute> [<Attribute>] [...]
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• Owner_Read
• Owner_Execute
• Group_Read
• Group_Execute
• World_Read
• World_Execute
Any combination of attributes is allowed.
Example
XAFilePermissions Owner_Read
Generating Emulation Images 4-77
CD Emulator
XAOwnerGroup
Function
Specifies the default file Owner Group Identifier.
Syntax
XAOwnerGroup <GroupIdentifier>
Default
The owner group defaults to zero.
Remarks
The owner group identifier is a number between 0 and 65535.
Example
XAOwnerGroup 27
XAOwnerUser
Function
Specifies the default file Owner User Identifier.
Syntax
XAOwnerUser <UserIdentifier>
Default
The owner user defaults to zero.
Remarks
The owner user identifier is a number between 0 and 65535.
Example
XAOwnerUser 15
4-78 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
XA Interleaved Channel Commands
XA Interleaved Channel commands define the contents of a channel within an XA File. The commands fall
into the following categories:
File space allocation definitions AddLength, MinLength
XA file attribute definitions XAAudioAttributes, XAEndOfRecord, XAFileAttributes,
XATrigger, XAVideoAttributes
File object definitions Source
Command definition termination XAEndChannel
Generating Emulation Images 4-79
CD Emulator
AddLength
Function
Specifies the number of bytes to be added to the length of the channel contents.
Syntax
AddLength <Length>
Default
If no command is encountered, then AddLength defaults to zero.
Remarks
This statement specifies a number of zero filled bytes to be added onto the end of the channel contents.
This channel may then be further zero filled to take it to a frame boundary.
AddLength will always be performed before MinLength. Therefore if we have a channel of say 400 bytes, an
AddLength of 1800 bytes will increase this size to 2200 bytes. A MinLength of 2048 will have no effect but
the final record will be written in 2 x 2048 bytes blocks (i.e. 2 frames).
Example
AddLength 512
See also: MinLength
MinLength
Function
Specifies the minimum number of bytes of a file record.
Syntax
MinLength <Length>
Default
If no command is encountered, then MinLength defaults to zero.
Remarks
This statement specifies a minimum size of channel record. If the channel is smaller than this, then it will be
blank filled to the specified size.
The channel may then be further zero filled to take it to a frame boundary.
AddLength will always be performed before MinLength. Therefore if we have a channel of say 400 bytes, an
AddLength of 1800 bytes will increase this size to 2200 bytes. A MinLength of 2048 will have no effect but
the final record will be written in 2 x 2048 bytes blocks (i.e. 2 frames).
Example
MinLength 512
See also: AddLength
4-80 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
Source
Function
Specifies that the contents of the channel are to be copied from the file specified.
Syntax
Source <FileName>
Remarks
This indicates that contents of the specified file should be used as the contents of the channel. Any
incomplete frame of data at the end of the channel will be padded with zeros.
There can be one and only one sourced file within a channel definition
Example
Source c:\develop\data\psyqace.bin
XAAudioAttributes
Function
Specifies the channel’s audio attribute flags.
Syntax
XAAudioAttributes <Attribute> [<Attribute>] [...]
Default
If no command is encountered, then the attributes default to the parent directory default.
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• Emphasis_On and Emphasis_Off
• ADPCM_B and ADPCM_C
• Mono and Stereo
Any combination of the non-mutually exclusive attributes is allowed.
This statement is only valid within an XA track for a channel defined as being Audio.
Example
XAAudioAttributes Emphasis_On Stereo
Generating Emulation Images 4-81
CD Emulator
XAEndChannel
Function
Marks the end of a channel definition.
Syntax
XAEndChannel
Remarks
The XAEndChannel statement closes the definition of an XAChannel record and returns control to the
previous command level.
Example
XAEndChannel
XAEndOfRecord
Function
Specifies the positions of End Of Record flags within the channel.
Syntax
XAEndOfRecord <EOROffset> [<EOROffset>] [...]
Remarks
This statement specifies the positions of end of record flags within the channel. This command can be
called more than once for a channel.
The EndOfRecord Offset is the number of frames into the channel (not the record) that the end-of-record
marker is to be set at.
Example
XAEndOfRecord 15 30 45 90
XAFileAttributes
Function
Specifies the file attribute flags.
Syntax
XAFileAttributes <Attribute> [<Attribute>]
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• Form1 or 1 and Form2 or 2
• Audio, Video and Data
Any combination of the non-mutually exclusive attributes is allowed.
Each channel must have form and data types defined explicitly within the channel definition.
Example
XAFileAttributes Form1 Data
4-82 Generating Emulation Images
CD Emulator
XATrigger
Function
Specifies the positions of trigger flags within the channel.
Syntax
XATrigger <TrigOffset> [<TrigOffset>] [...]
Remarks
This command can be called more than once for a channel.
The Trigger Offset is the number of frames into the channel that the trigger marker is to be set at.
Example
XATrigger 15 30 45 90
XAVideoAttributes
Function
Specifies the default video attribute flags.
Syntax
XAVideoAttributes <Attribute> [<Attribute>] [...]
Default
If no command is encountered, then the Attributes default to Application Specific.
Remarks
The valid attributes are:
• ApplicationSpecific
or a combination of
• 640x480 and 320x240
• Clut1, Clut2, Clut4 and Clut8
Any combination of the non-mutually exclusive attributes is allowed.
Example
XAVideoAttributes ApplicationSpecific
XAVideoAttributes 640x480 Clut2
CD Emulator
Chapter 5:
Tools and Techniques for
Development with the CD Emulator
5-2 Modifying the Emulation Image
CD Emulator
Modifying the Emulation Image 5-3
CD Emulator
.CTI File Creation
An easy method to create emulator control (*.CTI) files is to use the CDGEN software to generate your CDR image. Then save out the *.CCS file and convert it to a *.CTI file by using the routine CCS2CTI.EXE.
CCS2CTI is an MS-DOS command that converts CD-ROM format data from CCS to CTI. The format is
simply:
ccs2cti [-o <file>] [-v] <ccs-filename>
o <file> Output to file value of <file>. By default, this is
<ccs-filename>.cti.
-v Verbose mode
such as
ccs2cti foo.ccs
This will produce foo.cti, which you can then use to build your CD-ROM image on the hard-drive.
You can also use the "gencti" program described in further detail below.
Refer to the following control (.CTI) file for an example of Playstation CD-ROM disc with interleaved audio
and video. For more examples, refer to Appendix A.
File with interleaved audio and video
Disc CDROMXA
MapFile vid.map
LeadIn XA
Empty 1000
PostGap 150
EndTrack
Track XA
Pause 150
Volume ISO9660 cd.ISO
PrimaryVolume
SystemIdentifier "PSX"
VolumeIdentifier "PSXTEST"
VolumeSetIdentifier "PSXTEST"
PublisherIdentifier "SONY"
DataPreparerIdentifier "SONY"
ApplicationIdentifier "SONY"
Lpath
Mpath
Hierarchy
XAFileAttributes Form1 Data
File PSX.EXE
Source PSX.EXE
EndFile
Gap 26749
File Mov.str
XASource mov.str
EndFile
EndHierarchy
EndPrimaryVolume
EndVolume
EndTrack
LeadOut XA
Empty 500
EndTrack
EndDisc
5-4 Modifying the Emulation Image
CD Emulator
Warning: In the CTI format, be careful about the layout of files on a CD The contents of a sub-directory Warning:
must be physically contiguous.
Use the “layout-mode” of the CDGEN program to see the actual location layout.
Here’s an acceptable layout:
\DIR1\
\DIR1\AAA.DAT
\DIR1\BBB.DAT
\CCC.DAT
This is acceptable because the contents of directory "DIR1" immediately follow the declaration of "DIR1".
The next layout is unacceptable:
\DIR1\
\DIR1\AAA.DAT
\DDD.DAT
\DIR1\BBB.DAT <---split contents of DIR1
\CCC.DAT
This is not acceptable because the contents of "DIR1" are scattered among the declarations of other
directories and files.
Modifying the Emulation Image 5-5
CD Emulator
CDBoot6x.bin Usage
Run the program CDMON, which will install a TSR that displays information from the CD emulator in the top
right of a standard text screen. This information will continuously update as the emulation progresses. It can
be switched on and off by holding down the *left* hand control and shift keys and pressing C.
This display will only work if:
(1) You install version 6.x of the boot code and
(2) You have the PC hardware interrupt configured on the CD emulator board and you have informed
CDBIOS of the interrupt number.
If you install version 6.x of the boot code but do not have the interrupt set up properly or use an old version
of CDBIOS then the emulator will fail to function correctly.
5-6 Modifying the Emulation Image
CD Emulator
2MByte Emulation
Emulation sessions can be successfully executed with 8MByte RAM images, but the production Playstation
and the debugging stations can only handle 2MByte RAM images. Make sure that your application
emulates correctly with 2MBYTE, before going to GOLD DISC. Also make sure to remove pollhost and
other debugging hooks (PC READS and WRITES) before going to GOLD DISC.
Modifying the Emulation Image 5-7
CD Emulator
CDEmuPrm Instructions
This utility allows you to select normal or zero seek timings, and also to control errors within CD streams.
Both settings are unaffected by RESETPS (which causes the CD emulator's microcontroller to reload
CDBOOT from the SCSI HD).
Requirements:
Use at least CDBOOT35/CDBOOT65.
Seek Control:
To select zero seek times:
CDEMUPRM s 0
To reset the seek time to the default algorithm parameters:
CDEMUPRM s 1
Error Control:
General usage:
CDEMUPRM e [prm1,,prmN]
The error insertion algorithm is activated by the DEX issuing a CdlReadS command to the CD sub-system.
This command is used to playback streams. If an error occurs, then the DEX will receive an interrupt, but
the sub-system won't retry to read the sector.
Errors can be inserted at a fixed frequency or randomly via seed and threshold parameters. A RESETPS will
reset the internal parameters to what you originally specified, so that error patterns can be repeated on your
CD sector stream.
The error algorithm is done before a CD sector is signalled ready for the DEX to receive it. This means that
error patterns can be reproduced, since during seeks (which vary for the same seeks!) the Random() fn isn't
called.
Rnd = Random()
err_Count--
if(err_Count==0)
{
err_Count=err_Period //Reset the Count
if(Threshold>=Rnd)
Signal to DEX that this sector contains an error.
}
CDEmuPrm ERROR parameters, default values:
(UInt32)PERIOD 0000 0000
(UInt16)THRESHOLD 0000
(UInt47)SEED 7FFF FFFF FFF8
PERIOD is in CD sectors.
THRESHOLD is a 16 bit unsigned WORD.
SEED is a 47 bit WORD.
5-8 Modifying the Emulation Image
CD Emulator
To obtain a fixed frequency:
Specify a PERIOD only.
CDEMUPRM e 100
This example will set up the system to produce errors every 256 sectors.
IMPORTANT: Use a PERIOD greater than 1.
To obtain a random error pattern:
Specify a PERIOD, a THRESHOLD and an optional SEED.
CDEMUPRM e 10 1000
This example will set up the system to produce an error every 16 sectors, but only if the current random
value is >= 0x1000.
Some values that could be useful:
PERIOD THRESHOLD # of sectors read after 0x80 errors:
0x10 0xF000 0x4000
0x10 0x8000 0x0F00
0x10 0x1000 0x0880
To stop errors occurring:
CDEMUPRM e
This will set all parameters to their defaults.
Important Notes
The way the parameters are modified is fundamentally:
- Open door
- Modify parameters
- Close door
Parameters can't be modified on the fly during streaming playback. You should set the parameters up at
the start of your emulation session and only adjust them at suitable times (i.e., after RESETPS 1).
Modifying the Emulation Image 5-9
CD Emulator
cti2cd Instructions
“cti2cd” generates a CD without having to use CDGen. To use “cti2cd”, follow these steps:
1. Write a .cti file.
2. Run cti2cd.
cti2cd <file> -c<cutter> -r<cutter id> -x<speed> -t
<file> specifies the .cti file
-t specifies test mode (use this option the first time around)
-c specifies the cutter type: Sony(1), Yamaha(2), Kodak(3)
-r is the SCSI ID of the cutter
Be sure the correct ASPI driver is installed for your adapter.
This has only been tested on 1540 compatibles.
5-10 Modifying the Emulation Image
CD Emulator
CutCD Version 1.0
CutCD provides the user with the abilty to produce a Gold Disc CD from a CD emulator image stored on a
SCSI HD. The program currently supports two CDR devices: the Sony CDW-900E and the Yamaha CDR100 (firmware version1.08 or higher). To use the program, you must invoke it from the command line:
CutCD -s<hd id:partition no.> [options [-t] [-d<CDR id>] [-x<1,2 or 4> ]]
Note: / as well as - can be used to specify options. Note:
Options.
S - This must be present. This gives where the image is located on the CD emulator. The number preceding
the colon must be the SCSI ID of the HD. The number after the colon will be the particular partition where
the image is located. This is the same as the option used to specify the image location using
BuildCD/BCDFlat.
T - This is optional, although recommended the first time you use the program for a new image. This option
enables the test mode. In this mode, the burning of the CD will be simulated, without actually burning a
disc. The read power rather than the write power of the laser is used. This option is useful for setting up the
program and determining at which speed it is capable of cutting a CD.
D - This is optional. This option will specify the location (the SCSI ID ) of the device you wish to use to cut
the image. If this option is not present, the program will attempt to locate a device from those it finds on the
SCSI bus. If you are sure of the device’s location, then program speed will be greatly enhanced if the
location is specified. If more than one cutter is found on the bus, you will be asked to specify which device
you wish to use, from a list of options.
X - This enables the selection of the cutting speed. The default option is single speed cutting.
Once the program has begun you will be shown a detailed breakdown of information concerning the image
you are cutting and the cutting device you have specified. This is accompanied by an image completion
counter. Note: if the cutter is stopped or too fast a cutting speed is selected for your computer, any disc not
finished will, in most instances, be unusable. It is recommended that this program not be run whilst multitasking under Windows.
!! IMPORTANT !!
Futhermore, the image must have been built using BuildCD or BCDFlat version 2.32 or greater. This also
means that the complementary tools CDDisk and UpdateCD must be compatible. The lowest versions of
these that should be used are 1.17 and 1.18, respectively. If an older release is used, the programs will
report the disc image to be of an invalid mode or form. Also note that cutter and HD are both connected to
the SDevTC (formerly known as PSY-Q) scsi card, i.e., the program does not yet run off ASPI.
cutcd -s0:2 -d2 -t
This command will perform a test cut to the cutter, located at SCSI ID 2, from partition 2 of the HD located
at SCSI ID 0. Once this test run has been completed successfully, the command
cutcd -s0:2 -d2
will cut the disc properly.
Note: Please make sure before cutting that you have modified the size of the partition on which the image is Note:
located so that it is of minimum size. Otherwise the program will write any excess to the disc. You will
probably get better performance if you run the program natively in DOS, although it has been used in a
Windows DOS box. When you load CDBios, use the /d option to specify a DMA channel to increase
performance. There will be less likelihood of the buffer in the CDW or CDR machines underflowing. Note
also that the CDW will take a noticeable time between starting the image write (where it writes the Lead-In
Modifying the Emulation Image 5-11
CD Emulator
Track) and when it starts to use the image data. There is a small problem with setting the timeout in this
part of the program, due to selecting x1 or x2 speed. Most developers have expressed that x2 cutting on
the CDW can be unreliable. Therefore the timeout is currently optimized for single speed cutting to ensure
reliabilty of data transfered. The writer ID of the CDW-900e must be 0 (zero).
Finally, if you are cutting an image shorter than 4 minutes, add some dummy data to the image using
AddLength or Minlength commands.
5-12 Modifying the Emulation Image
CD Emulator
GenCTI Instructions
GenCTI is designed to make to creation of .cti files (.cti being the usual extension for CD emulator and CD
cutting software control files) easier for those people who have not constructed one before. It is not the aim
of this program to generate fully any but the most simple and straightforward of control files. Saying that,
the program does provide a certain amount of flexibility, such as the specification of wildcard inclusions.
There are two programs which rely on these control files, namely, BuildCD (along with a flat model version
known as BCDFlat) and CTI2CD. BuildCD is for use with the CD emulator, and CTI2CD will cut CD gold
discs (presently on the Sony CDW-900E and Yamaha CDR-100 dev ices), based on a control file.
GenCTI is a DOS command line program. To run it and display a full list of options type:
>gencti
at the command prompt.
The following will be displayed:
GenCTI version 1.0 Beta
Copyright (c) SN Systems Ltd. 26 March 1996
Format: GenCTI outfile [options]
Purpose: Automatically generates a cti file from the file contained in the directory
and subdirectories from where the program is invoked. Directory can be
overridden, see options.'outfile' given default extension .cti
Options:
/t=target Playstation - PlayStation specific
saturn - saturn specific
(default mode 1, data)
/dir=<dir> specify directory to be root on CD
/system=<file> specify filename for system file
/nosubdirs do not recurse subdirectories
/wildcard=<file> specify wildcard list
/audio=<dir> specify directory for audio tracks
Note: Only the first letter of each option needs to be specified.
- or / may be used as switches.
The following are definitions of the options:
Option t=target t=target t=target. This option explicitly defines the target machine and generates a .cti file suitable for the
machine.
Option dir=<directory> dir=<directory> dir=<directory>. By default, the program will use the directory from where it is called as the root
directory in the .cti file. To override this, specify a different directory, (full path) with this option.
Option system=<system file>. system=<system file>. system=<system file>. The system file is a special file, specific to individual machines, territories
or developers, which is positioned before the main disc data. This option enables the location and name
of this system file to be specified and correctly included.
Option nosubdirs nosubdirs nosubdirs. This option speaks for itself, sub directories will not be included. The control file will
contain only one directory, the root.
Option wildcards wildcards wildcards. This option is a bit more involved than the others, relying on the creation of a wildcard
file. Just create a text file including the wildcard definitions, each separated by a newline/return and save.
The wildcard definitions can be 31 characters maximum. This file is then added as the file specified in the
option.
The following is an example of a wildcard file: wild.wcd.
*.bin
Modifying the Emulation Image 5-13
CD Emulator
s*.tex
game?.aud
t*.ma*
*.dat
lev*.00?
The command line option would then appear as
/wildcard=wild.wcd
Presently a maximum of 15 definitions are allowed.
Option audio. This option requires further explanation to avoid including audio files twice. The directory
specified for the location of audio tracks should not lie as a subdirectory off the directory specified as the
root. Using this will generate a separate audio track for each file present in the audio directory.
Note: wildcards apply throughout the program if specified. If wildcards are specified and an audio directory
is specified, the wildcards must contain inclusion information for the audio files. E.g., if the audio tracks all
have the extension .wav, then *.wav must be included in your wildcard list.
5-14 Modifying the Emulation Image
CD Emulator
MultiCD Instructions
MultiCD can be used to change to a 'new CD' without using CDDisk to write a new partition offset onto the
HD or having to reset the target. The 'new CD' can be another partition on the current HD or on any other
HD on the SCSI bus that contains valid CD images.
For DEX boards, use at least CDBoot30.BIN or CDBoot60.BIN.
For Saturn, use at least SatCD12.BIN or SatCD22.BIN.
Use at least CDBIOS.COM v1.04.
For full feedback using CDBoot60.BIN, use CDMon v1.02. (This will display the partition baseblock on an
emulator reset.)
Usage: MultiCD [id [partition]]
MultiCD id partition
This simulates an open door for one second, then changes to the new CD at the specified SCSI ID and
partition.
If an ID is selected with no HD, then you will receive a 'Target did not respond' message, but as a side
effect the emulator will begin open door simulation. To close it, either reissue the command with a valid ID
and partition or close it via the MultiCD main menu.
CD Emulator
Chapter 6:
Modifying the Emulation Image
6-2 Modifying the Emulation Image
CD Emulator
Modifying the Emulation Image 6-3
CD Emulator
Modifying the Emulation Image-Using UPDATECD
BuildCD will generate the whole CD image each time it is run. However, if only one file has changed then
modification can be a very lengthy process. UpdateCD, however, will determine which files have changed
since the last creation/modification took place and will only write those to the HD. It requires the name of
the map file that was generated by BuildCD as its parameter.
If BuildCD was run using the following command line:
BUILDCD-mexample.map -s0:1 example.cti
then the file example.map will contain all the relevant information to allow UpdateCD to write only files that
changed since last time.
So if immediately after the above example the following was run
UPDATECD example.map
then nothing will be updated.
If, however, one of the files written by BuildCD was modified, then UpdateCD will detail the consequences
of the change and ask the user if this modification should be made.
There will be cases where a file increases in length so much that it will affect following files. Then the user
will need to modify the space allocation in the original control file and rebuild using BuildCD.
UpdateCD takes the following command line form:
UPDATECD [options] [map filename]
Available options are:
-e<num> To restrict the number of warnings messages given.
-w To suppress all warnings.
The mapfile contains all the information needed to do its updating, including the ID and partition number of all
the disk that the original image was created on.
6-4 Modifying the Emulation Image
CD Emulator
CD Emulator
Chapter 7:
Connecting Multiple Emulation Hard Drives
7-2 Connecting Multiple Emulation Hard Drives
CD Emulator
Connecting Multiple Emulation Hard Drives 7-3
CD Emulator
Hard Drive Connections
As you know, this emulator system is based upon its local implementation of a SCSI bus. This electronics
standard allows for up to 8 devices to share a common data pathway. However, to avoid reflection of
signals from the ends of the bus, each end needs to be terminated, a termination simply being a resistor
connection between each of the signal lines on the bus and ground.
Hard drives usually have a configurable termination, and are generally shipped with this active. The emulator
board also has this termination fitted and can be considered as ‘one end’ of the bus. Therefore, with only
one internal drive fitted ‘both ends’ of the bus are terminated. This also applies if an external drive is fitted.
However, if you wish to use more than one hard drive, then you need to determine which devices are ‘on
the ends’ and remove the terminations from the ones ‘between’.
Refer to the manual supplied with your internal hard drive to determine how to remove the termination.
External hard drives generally have two connectors, one of which is connected to the SCSI cable and the
other connected to a termination pack.
So with an internal hard drive, schematically the system is:
Figure 7–1: Emulator with Internal Hard Drive
Internal External
Emulator
Card
HD
T
T
with both ends terminated (T).
With an external hard drive:
Figure 7–2: Emulator with External Hard Drive
Internal External
Emulator
Card
HD
T
T
Again, both ends are terminated.
7-4 Connecting Multiple Emulation Hard Drives
CD Emulator
If the requirement is for an internal and an external drive then:
Figure 7–3: Emulator with Internal and External Hard Drives
Internal External
Emulator
Card
HD
T
HD
T
is how the chain should be configured.
NOTE: The termination is missing from the emulator board (see later for how to remove the termination
from the card).
For two internal drives:
Figure 7–4: Emulator with Two Internal Hard Drives
Internal External
Emulator
Card
T
HD
T
HD
NOTE: The termination has now been disabled from the middle device (instructions to disable the
termination from a hard drive will be in the manual supplied with it).
For two external hard drives:
Figure 7–5: Emulator with Two External Hard Drives
T
HD HD
Internal External
Emulator
Card
T
For configurations that need more than two hard drives (either internal, external or a mixture of both) the
above still applies. It is only the devices that are on each end of the bus that need to have termination.
Connecting Multiple Emulation Hard Drives 7-5
CD Emulator
Removing the Termination Resistors from the CD Emulator Board
In some of the above examples the emulator board did not require termination. However, it is supplied with
termination resistors fitted.
Figure 7–6: Emulator Termination Resistors
J3
J2
J1 J4
C2
C3
C1
J5
Termination
Resistor Packs
Each of the resistor packs are fitted into sockets to allow for easy removal. However, not all the packs are of
the same value. Mark and note the position and orientation of each of the packs prior to removal. This will
facilitate their easy replacement. Be very careful not to bend the pins of these packs during removal.
7-6 Connecting Multiple Emulation Hard Drives
CD Emulator
CD Emulator
Appendix A:
Sample Control Files
A-2 Sample Control Files
CD Emulator
Sample Control Files A-3
CD Emulator
Sample Control Files
An example of a high-level disc-defining control file. Note how it includes example file 2, below, and
therefore processes it.
Echo “Building Image”
Define PsyQ c:\psyQ\dev\
ShowDefines
Disc CDROM state.img
CatalogNumber 47646
MapFile [PsyQ]state.map
BInaryFileOutput [PsyQ]state.cdb
LeadIn AUDIO
Empty 150
EndTrack
Track MODE1
Pause 150
SubcSource [PsyQ]subc\subc1.sbc
Include state.ctl; Volume Definition
SubcEmpty
EndTrack
Track MODE1
SubcSource [PsyQ]subc\dsubcs.sll
Source [PsyQ]state.trk
SubcEmpty
PostGap 150
EndTrack
Track Audio
Pause 150
Source [PsyQ]state1.trk
EndTrack
LeadOut AUDIO
Empty 150
EndTrack
EndDisc
An example of a volume-defining control file. Although this file can be included in file 1 above, it can also be
used on its own.
Echo Control file test for directory structures
Volume ISO9660 state.trk
SystemArea [PsyQ]share.exe
PrimaryVolume
AbstractFileIdentifier AUTOEXEC.BAT
ApplicationIdentifier “_AUTOEXEC.BAT”
ApplicationUse [PsyQ]appuse.txt
BibliographicFileIdentifier AARON.PTT
CopyrightFileIdentifier CONFIG.SYS
DataPreparerIdentifier _AUTOEXEC.BAT;1
DescriptorWrites 1
PublisherIdentifier “SNSYSTEMS”
SystemIdentifier CD
VolumeCreationDate 10/17/198908:12:00:00 00
VolumeEffectiveDate 09/18/1990 09:13:00:00 00
VolumeExpirationDate 10/04/1991 07:15:22:00 -12
VolumeIdentifier TOME
VolumeModificationDate1 12/25/1993 00:00:00:00 00
A-4 Sample Control Files
CD Emulator
VolumeSetIdentifier TICTACTOE
Hierarchy
File AUTOEXEC.BAT;1
Source \autoexec.bat
EndFile
File CONFIG.SYS;1
Source \config.sys
EndFile
Directory CHKDEMO
SourceDirectory \chkdemo SubDirectories SpareSpace=100%
EndDirectory
Directory GRAPHICS
File FRED.PTT 3
Source \setnil.bat
EndFile
File GINGER.PTT 4
Source \setmap.bat
EndFile
Directory MONGEESE
File ARNIE.PTT 5
Source \setnml.bat
EndFile
EndDirectory
File AARDVARK.PTT 6
Source \config.nil
EndFile
EndDirectory
Directory GRAPHICS1
MinLength 2045
AddLength 200
File FRED.PTT 3
Source \config.nml
EndFile
File GINGER.PTT 4
Source \config.ptt
EndFile
Directory MONGEESE
File ARNIE.PTT 5
Source \setmap.ptt
AddLength2048
EndFile
EndDirectory
File AARDVARK.PTT 6
Source \setmap.blr
EndFile
EndDirectory
File AARON.PTT
Source \setmap.blt
EndFile
EndHierarchy
Lpath
MPath
Sample Control Files A-5
CD Emulator
EndPrimaryVolume
VolumePartition
DescriptorWrites 3
SystemIdentifier CD
SystemUse \setmap.crd
VolumePartitionData \snlpt.ddt
VolumePartitionIdentifier PARTITION1
EndVolumePartition
BootRecord
BootIdentifier V1.0
DescriptorWrites 2
SystemIdentifier CD
SystemUse \setmap.crg
EndBootRecord
EndVolume
Example XA Control File
demo.cti
Define PsyQ c:\psyQ\
ShowDefines
Disc CDROMXA demo.img
CatalogNumber 47646
MapFile demo.map
BInaryFileOutput demo.cdb
LeadIn XA
Empty 1000
PostGap 150
EndTrack
Track XA
Pause 150
SubcSource \autoexec.bat
Include demo.ctl ; Track definition
SubcEmpty
PostGap 150
EndTrack
Track Audio
ISRC UKSNS9400001
SubcSource bcdmap.obj
Source \dev\trk\state1.trk
SubcEmpty
EndTrack
Track Audio
Copy On
PreEmphasis On
Source \dev\trk\state1.trk
EndTrack
LeadOut AUDIO
Empty 150
EndTrack
EndDisc
demo.ctl
Volume ISO9660 demo.trk
SystemArea [psyq]sysarea.exe
PrimaryVolume
A-6 Sample Control Files
CD Emulator
AbstractFileIdentifier ABS.TXT
ApplicationIdentifier “_APP.TXT”
ApplicationUse [psyq]txt\appuse.cdn
BibliographicFileIdentifier BIB.TXT
CopyrightFileIdentifier CPY.TXT
DataPreparerIdentifier _DTP.TXT
DescriptorWrites 1
PublisherIdentifier “SNSYSTEMS”
SystemIdentifier CD
VolumeCreationDate 10/17/1989 08:12:00:00 00
VolumeEffectiveDate 09/18/1990 09:13:00:00 00
VolumeExpirationDate 10/04/1991 07:15:22:00 -12
VolumeIdentifier Vol_Id
VolumeModificationDate 12/25/1993 00:00:00:00 00
VolumeSetIdentifier Vol_Set_One
Hierarchy
XAFileAttributes Form1 Data
XAVideoAttributes 640x480 Clut4
XAAudioAttributes Emphasis_On ADPCM_B Mono
XAFilePermissions World_Read World_Execute
XAOwnerGroup 56
XAOwnerUser 1
File ABS.TXT
Source[psyQ]txt\abstract.txt
EndFile
File APP.TXT
Source[psyQ]txt\app_id.txt
EndFile
File BIB.TXT
Source[psyQ]txt\biblio.txt
EndFile
File CPY.TXT
Source [psyQ]txt\cpyright.txt
EndFile
File DTP.TXT
Source[psyQ]txt\dataprep.txt
EndFile
; File with channels interleaved within the BuildCD program
;
XAInterleavedFile autoexec.bat;1
XAChannelInterleave TimeCritical 2-X-2-X Even
XAChannel 1
Source C:\dev\buildcd\bcdmain.c
XAFileAttributes Form1 Data
AddLength 2332
XAEndChannel
XAChannel 2
Source C:\dev\buildcd\bcdbasic.c
XAFileAttributes Form2 Audio
XAEndOfRecord 1 8 EndOfFile
XAAudioAttributes Emphasis_Off
XAEndChannel
XAChannel 3
Source C:\dev\buildcd\bcdfront.c
XAFileAttributes Form1 Video
XAEndChannel
XAEndInterleavedFile
; File defined within XA with no interleaves
Sample Control Files A-7
CD Emulator
;
File CONFIG.SYS;1
XAFileAttributes Form2 Audio
XATrigger 0 2 4
XAEndOfRecord EndOfFile 1
Source \config.sys
MinLength 10000
EndFile
AddLength 2048
MinLength 8192
Directory CHKDEMO
SourceDirectory \chkdemo SubDirectories SpareSpace=100%
EndDirectory
Directory GRAPHICS
; File with channel interleaving already performed
;
File FRED.PTT 3
XASource \setnil.bat
EndFile
File GINGER.PTT 4
Source \setmap.bat
EndFile
Directory MONGEESE
File ARNIE.PTT 5
Source \setnml.bat
EndFile
EndDirectory
EndDirectory
EndHierarchy
Lpath
MPath
EndPrimaryVolume
VolumePartition
DescriptorWrites 3
SystemIdentifier CD
SystemUse \setmap.bat
VolumePartitionData \dev\buildcd\buildcd.exe
VolumePartitionIdentifier PARTITION1
EndVolumePartition
BootRecord
BootIdentifier V1.0
DescriptorWrites 2
SystemIdentifier CD
SystemUse \setmap.bat
EndBootRecord
EndVolume
A-8 Sample Control Files
CD Emulator
The following is a sample map file.
========================================================================
= Generated Map File C:\DEV\BUILDCD\STATE1.MAP for Image File
C:\DEV\BUILDCD\STATE1.IMG
=
========================================================================
Image C:\DEV\BUILDCD\STATE1.IMG 03/10/1994 14:31:48 2967552
(CAT:0000000047646)
========================================================================
= Command Fr Time Len LBN Additional
========================================================================
LeadIn 0 XA
Empty 00:00:00 150
PostGap 00:02:00 150
Track 1 XA
Pause 00:04:00 150
TrackDef
SystemArea 00:06:00 16 0 09/04/1991 05:00:00 10912
Form1 C:\SHARE.EXE
PrimVol 00:06:16 1 16
TermVol 00:06:17 1 17
Lpath 00:06:18 1 18
OptLpath 00:06:19 1 19
Mpath 00:06:20 1 20
OptMpath 00:06:21 1 21
Dir() 00:06:22 1 22
Dir(GRAPHICS) 00:06:23 1 23
File(FRED.PTT) 00:06:24 1 24 00:06:23 31/03/1994 13:42:30 62
Form1 C:\SETNIL.BAT
File(GINGER.PTT) 00:06:25 1 25 00:06:23 02/08/1994 16:25:56 320
Form1 C:\SETMAP.BAT
File(AARDVARK.PTT) 00:06:26 1 26 00:06:23 24/03/1994 12:20:58 111
Form1 C:\CONFIG.NIL
Dir(MONGEESE) 00:06:27 1 27
File(ARNIE.PTT) 00:06:28 1 28 00:06:27 21/04/1994 13:52:12 62
Form1 C:\SETNML.BAT
EndTrackDef
PostGap 00:06:29 150
Track 2 Audio(COPY:OFF PRE_EMPH:OFF)
Pause 00:08:29 150
Source 00:10:29 73 02/10/199418:00:12170563
C:\DEV\BUILDCD\BCDWRITE.C
Track 3 Audio(COPY:OFF PRE_EMPH:OFF)
Pause 00:11:27 150
Source 00:13:27 7 03/01/1994 02:20:00
16384 H:\AMEOL\DOWNLOAD\WINSORT.EXE
LeadOut 4 Audio(COPY:OFF PRE_EMPH:OFF)
Empty 00:13:34 150
CD Emulator
Appendix B:
ISO Character Sets
B-2 ISO Character Sets
CD Emulator
ISO Character Sets B-3
CD Emulator
ISO Character Sets
Figure B–1: ISO 'd' characters (shown unshaded)
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
0
1
2
3
4
5
7
6
8
9
A
C
B
D
F
E
least
significant
nibble
NUL DLE SP 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
:
;
<
=
>
?
@ P p
SCH DC1 ! A Q a q
STX DC2
DC4
ETX DC3
EDT
ENQ
ACK
BEL
BS
HT
LF
VT
FF
CR
SQ
S1
NAK
SYN
ETB
CAN
EM
SUB
ESC
IS4
IS1
1S4
1S3
"
#
%
&
'
(
)
*
+
,
-
.
/
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
[
]
\
^
_ o
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
m
n
r
s
t
u
v
w
x
y
z
}
|
}
~
DEL
B-4 ISO Character Sets
CD Emulator
Figure B–2: ISO 'a' characters (shown unshaded)
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
0
1
2
3
4
5
7
6
8
9
A
C
B
D
F
E
least
significant
nibble
NUL DLE SP 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
:
;
<
=
>
?
@ P p
SCH DC1 ! A Q a q
STX DC2
DC4
ETX DC3
EDT
ENQ
ACK
BEL
BS
HT
LF
VT
FF
CR
SQ
S1
NAK
SYN
ETB
CAN
EM
SUB
ESC
IS4
IS1
1S4
1S3
"
#
%
&
'
(
)
*
+
,
-
.
/
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
[
]
\
^
_ o
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
m
n
r
s
t
u
v
w
x
y
z
}
|
}
~
DEL
CD Emulator
Appendix C:
SCSI Errors
C-2SCSI Errors
CD Emulator
SCSI Errors C-3
CD Emulator
SCSI Errors
The hundreds and thousands places in a hexadecimal error code can be interpreted as the following:
Table C–1: SCSI Error Definition
Sense Key Description
00 No sense
01 Recovered error
02 Not ready
03 Medium error
04 Hardware error
05 Illegal request
06 Unit attention (could be unit has been reset)
07 Data protect (write protected)
08 Blank check
09 Vendor specific
0A Copy aborted
0B Aborted command
0C Equal (for search data requests)
0D Volume overflow
0E Miscompare
0F Reserved
C-4SCSI Errors
CD Emulator