September 18, 1998
Reports of assaults keep pouring in. We've sent our officers out on increased patrols. They'll catch the perpetrators soon enough!

September 19
We've received information that the perpetrators all share certain traits. They look pale, ashen, almost dead, and they're extremely aggressive in public. Are we dealing with a gang of drug addicts in my city?

September 20
It hit me like a thunderclap. This gang of addicts is actually attacking people and eating them. They're cannibals. Whatever they're on makes them so numb to pain that they keep staggering toward our officers even after being shot, as if nothing had happened.

September 21
Now civilians are increasingly seeking refuge from the gang here at the police station. Some barely escaped with their lives after being bitten by these savages. And there seem to be more and more of them out there. What on earth is going on?

September 22
I can hardly believe it...
They're not drug addicts...
They're... I don't know... some kind of monsters that look like people... and we let them into our station... Many of our officers are dead, there's blood everywhere, and there are more of them all the time... Once people get bitten, they become one of them...

September 26
I've ordered my men to hold their positions and look after any remaining civilians. I know it's been a while since any civilians came to us for shelter, but it is our goddamn duty as police officers to save every last civilian we can.

September 27
That's it... one of those things got me... so I'll become one of them too. But I'll keep fighting for the civilians and my fellow officers for as long as I can. Since the number of these things keeps growing, I've ordered the shutters between the sections lowered as an additional barrier. The areas in between can still be held by the few officers we have left.

September 28
And now this... someone seems to be sabotaging us from the inside. The communications system has been shot to pieces and the power cut... We can no longer protect the civilians when we ourselves are under attack...
All is lost... I've asked my colleagues to distribute the rest of our equipment and stash it at strategic points throughout the station, so that any other survivors seeking shelter here will have a chance...
Leon, Marvin, Elliott, Roy... I hope you make it out alive!
